Article 1:

   
     Nonexudative ARMD 
       Nonexudative ARMD: Practice Essentials, Background, Pathophysiology Nonexudative ARMD Clinical Presentation: History, Physical, Causes Nonexudative ARMD Differential Diagnoses Nonexudative ARMD Workup: Laboratory Studies, Imaging Studies, Other Tests Nonexudative ARMD Treatment & Management: Medical Care, Surgical Care, Consultations Nonexudative ARMD Medication Nonexudative ARMD Follow-up: Further Outpatient Care, Inpatient & Outpatient Medications, Complications 
       Nonexudative ARMD: Practice Essentials, Background, Pathophysiology Nonexudative ARMD Clinical Presentation: History, Physical, Causes Nonexudative ARMD Differential Diagnoses Nonexudative ARMD Workup: Laboratory Studies, Imaging Studies, Other Tests Nonexudative ARMD Treatment & Management: Medical Care, Surgical Care, Consultations Nonexudative ARMD Medication Nonexudative ARMD Follow-up: Further Outpatient Care, Inpatient & Outpatient Medications, Complications 
       Overview
 Practice Essentials Background Pathophysiology Frequency Mortality/Morbidity Presentation
 History Physical Causes Differential Diagnoses
 Workup
 Laboratory Studies Imaging Studies Other Tests Procedures Histologic Findings Treatment
 Medical Care Surgical Care Consultations Diet Activity Medication
 Follow-up
 Further Outpatient Care Inpatient & Outpatient Medications Complications Prognosis Patient Education 
       Nonexudative ARMD Overview Nonexudative ARMD Clinical Presentation Nonexudative ARMD Differential Diagnoses Nonexudative ARMD Workup Nonexudative ARMD Treatment Nonexudative ARMD Medication Nonexudative ARMD Follow-up 1223154-overview Apr 24, 2014 2015-08-12-15:09 0 Ophthalmology 2002 Diseases & Conditions Condition 
       1 2 content 1223154 502 5005291 36 ssg 
     Jun 04, 2015 
       condition Diseases & Conditions 
       ophthalmology Ophthalmology 
       ophthalmology_retina Retina nonexudative ARMD, nonexudative age-related macular degeneration, nonexudative AMD, age-related macular degeneration, AMD, dry macular degeneration, macular degeneration, senile macular degeneration, geographic atrophy, drusen, drusenoid changes, pigment epithelial degeneration, photodynamic therapy, PDT, transpupillary thermotherapy, TTT, IRIS medical laser, rheopheresis, complications of age-related macular degeneration prevention trial, CAPT, drusen ablation, laser to drusen, CNFT, intraocular implant, CHF, complement factor H gene Age-related macular degeneration (ARMD) is the most common cause of irreversible vision loss in the developed world. ARMD is associated with the presence of drusen, without visual loss early in the disease, and often progresses to retinal atrophy and central retinal degeneration with associated loss of central vision. 0 Nonexudative ARMD 
     Overview 
       Practice Essentials 
         Nonexudative (dry) age-related macular degeneration (ARMD) (see the image below) comprises more than 90% of patients diagnosed with ARMD. ARMD is the most common cause of irreversible vision loss in the developed world; this condition is associated with the presence of drusen, without visual loss early in the disease, and often progresses to retinal atrophy and central retinal degeneration with associated loss of central vision. Generally, nonexudative ARMD has a much slower (over decades), progressive visual loss relative to exudative (wet) ARMD (over months). 
           Moderate nonexudative age-related macular degeneration is shown with the presence of drusen (... Moderate nonexudative age-related macular degeneration is shown with the presence of drusen (yellow deposits) in the macular region.  
         Signs and symptoms Signs and symptoms of ARMD include the following: 
           
             Difficulty with night vision and with changing light conditions (specifically, changes in Amsler grid self-evaluation and trouble with reading)  
             Visual fluctuation (ie, some days vision is poor; other days, vision appears improved) 
             Difficulty with reading and making out faces 
             Metamorphopsia (distortion of visual images): Not a major patient complaint, but it may be present as the atrophy slowly progresses See  Clinical Presentation 
         Diagnosis Funduscopic examination in patients with suspected ARMD includes the following findings:  
           
             AMRD: Significant for the presence of drusen, usually confluent with significant pigment changes and pigment accumulation in the posterior pole; retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) often appears atrophic, with easier visualization of the underlying choroid plexus  
             Advanced stages of nonexudative ARMD: Coalescence of focal islands of atrophy and formation of large zones of atrophy with severely affected vision  
             Choroidal neovascularization: RPE elevation, exudate, or subretinal fluid 
           Procedures 
           
             Fluorescein angiography: Has value in patients with AMRD who note a recent onset or worsening of vision associated with metamorphopsia 
             Amsler grid evaluation: Cornerstone of evaluation of nonexudative AMRD 
             Slit-lamp biomicroscopy 
             Biopsy and histologic examination 
           Imaging studies 
           
             Fundus photography: Best modality to follow nonexudative ARMD 
             Optical coherence tomography (optional; may be used to follow disease progression): To examine retinal thickness 
             Multifocal electroretinography (optional; may be used to follow disease progression): To evaluate functional response of retinal rods and cones  See  Workup 
         Management Prevention is the best treatment for nonexudative ARMD, because no satisfactory method exists to treat this condition. Accumulated evidence suggests that ARMD is a genetic disease.  Management of nonexudative ARMD may include the following [ 
           
             Intravitreal injection with ranibizumab, bevacizumab, or pegaptanib sodium 
             Photodynamic therapy with verteporfin 
             Thermal laser photocoagulation surgery 
           Nonpharmacotherapy 
           
             Antioxidant vitamin and mineral supplements (vitamin A, vitamin E, zinc, and lutein) [ 
             Screening for impaired visual acuity 
             Wraparound shades (eg, orange-tinted, blue blocker lenses): Effective solution for delayed dark adaptation and to protect eyes from direct sunlight  
             Avoidance/cessation of tobacco use 
             Frequent follow-up for risk assessment of conversion to exudative ARMD See  Treatment Medication 
       Background 
         Age-related macular degeneration (ARMD) is the most common cause of irreversible vision loss in the developed world. ARMD is associated with the presence of drusen, without visual loss early in the disease, and often progresses to retinal atrophy and central retinal degeneration with associated loss of central vision. The intermediate form is associated with loss of retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) and the overlying retinal layers (atrophy), with loss of contrast sensitivity, loss of reading speed, and difficulty with adaptation to changing light conditions. The advanced, nonexudative form of ARMD is characterized by the presence of atrophy that can be associated with severe central visual-field loss. In all forms of dry ARMD, peripheral visual acuity is preserved.  Exudative ARMD Greater than 90% of patients diagnosed with ARMD have nonexudative (dry) ARMD; nonexudative ARMD is generally associated with much slower (over decades), progressive visual loss compared with exudative (wet) ARMD, which is generally associated with more rapid (over months) visual loss. However, patients with the more advanced cases of dry ARMD can have as profound a visual loss as those with exudative ARMD. ARMD describes a collection of inherited diseases (multifactorial) that share common features, including age predilection, positive family history, presence of yellow-gray material in the Bruch membrane (ie, drusen), RPE changes (eg, atrophy, clumping, RPE detachments) in the posterior pole or periphery, and visual disturbances (eg, abnormal reading, stereo and/or color vision disturbances, dark/light adaptation disturbances). RPE degeneration is accompanied by variable loss of both the overlying photoreceptors and the underlying choroidal perfusion. When the appropriate age and clinical findings are accompanied by the loss of visual acuity, visual field, or other visual functions, the condition is often classified as ARMD. At times, the step prior to the onset of visual loss has been classified as ARMD if the patient has characteristic drusen and relevant family history. ARMD usually manifests after age 50 years. The disease is often bilateral, and patients report a significant history of disease in family members who have lived to later years of their life. Many patients develop a more rapid form of visual loss secondary to the development of neovascularization from the choroid that develops either below or above the RPE; this form of ARMD is referred to as wet, while the more prevalent form is known as dry. When the dry form of ARMD progresses with larger areas of RPE atrophy, the condition is referred to as geographic atrophy (GA). GA usually is bilateral but not necessarily symmetrical. It can develop neovascularization and result in a more rapid loss of vision. Antioxidant multivitamin therapy (consisting of vitamin A at 25,000 IU, vitamin C at 500 mg, zinc at 80 mg, copper at 2 mg, and vitamin E at 400 mg) has been shown in a large clinical trail, the Age-Related Eye Diseases Study (AREDS), to be helpful in decreasing the risk of visual loss with nonexudative ARMD. Most of the decrease in visual loss appeared to be due to a reduced risk of conversion to wet ARMD. The AREDS notably did not show any benefit with the use of these vitamins in very early ARMD or in those subjects without ARMD at baseline. The Women's Antioxidant and Folic Acid Cardiovascular Study looked at a cohort of women without any evidence of ARMD. The randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial included 5442 female healthcare professionals and noted that a combination of folic acid (2.5 mg/d), pyridoxine hydrochloride (50 mg/d), and cyanocobalamin (1 mg/d) reduced the relative risk of developing visually significant ARMD by approximately 40%. The study also demonstrated a reduced risk of developing nonvisually significant ARMD by a similar amount. [ A phase I study demonstrated visual benefit and decreased progression of ARMD in subjects with advanced dry ARMD who were provided with an  intravitreal implant Additional therapies that have been tried include rheopheresis (apheresis) and laser to drusen. While these therapies demonstrated a small benefit over the short term (1-3 y), they did not prove to have any significant benefit after that time. In fact, the Complications of Age-related Macular Degeneration Prevention Trial (CAPT) has demonstrated that laser to drusen is ultimately not beneficial and may potentially be harmful.  
       Pathophysiology 
         Clinical pathophysiology The clinical definition of early age-related macular degeneration (ARMD) varies with the source consulted. A clinically useful guideline is when drusen in the posterior pole are greater than 5 in number and at least 63 µm in size. With time, drusen enlarge and result in shallow elevation of the RPE that overlies the Bruch membrane. These deposits may merge over time, and they can be associated with pigmentation change visible on ophthalmoscopy. Evaluation of the AREDS results provided a clinically useful method of determining risk of advanced ARMD by the use of simple criteria: (1) presence of large drusen (greater than 125 µm in size) and (2) the presence of pigment abnormalities. Thus, one eye having both large drusen and pigment abnormalities has a score of 2 (1 for each criterion), and if both eyes have each risk factor, the score is 4. Using this simplified criteria, the AREDS found that over 5 years, eyes with a risk factor score of 0 had only a 0.4% move to advanced ARMD, while those with 1 risk factor had a 3.1% move to advanced ARMD. However, when eyes had 2, 3, or 4 risk factors, the rate of advanced ARMD conversion (either large geographic atrophy or neovascularization) increased to 12%, 26%, and 47% respectively. [ Because the above matrix is a simple and powerful tool to determine the persons who will develop advanced ARMD, it is useful to recollect the criteria when performing a clinical examination. For example, the presence of a large druse (125 µm in size) would be most easily remembered by looking for drusen whose shortest diameter is approximately 125 µm (or as large as the diameter of a retinal vein at the optic disc margin). Only drusen within 2 disc diameters of the center were used during the analysis. Pigment abnormalities included any areas of hyperpigmentation or hypopigmentation, as well as noncentral areas of geographic atrophy. Visual acuity loss or visual-field loss occurs when the RPE atrophies and results in secondary loss of the overlying photoreceptor cells that it supplies. The variety of fundus changes described above defines dry ARMD. When the damaged RPE results in the development of choroidal neovascularization with late leakage on fluoresce in angiography and a decrease in vision and metamorphopsia, exudative (wet) ARMD is said to occur. 
         Molecular pathophysiology Dry ARMD is an inherited autosomal dominant disease that appears to be affected by nutrition and environmental factors. Nonexudative ARMD is characterized by the degeneration of the retina and the choroid in the posterior pole due to either atrophy or RPE detachment. The atrophy is generally preceded (or coincident in some cases) by the presence of yellow extracellular deposits adjacent to the basal surface of the RPE called drusen. Drusen are composed of vitronectin (a multifunctional plasma and extracellular matrix protein), lipids, immune and inflammatory related proteins, amyloid associated proteins, as well as other poorly characterized substances. While drusen were thought to be the result of accumulated waste material from subretinal tissues, data now suggest that the accumulation is due to the presence of inflammation in the subretinal space. This extracellular material in the Bruch membrane is composed of various substances, including vitronectin and proteinaceous material. The complement system is an alternative system (ie, independent of antibodies) of defense against infection. Complement factor H (CFH) is a robust anti-inflammatory agent, in that it protects host cells from complement-mediated damage by binding to the activated complement component C3b. In 2005, four separate groups reported that a common variation in the  CFH In 2006, two other genes were identified that increased the risk similarly. The CFH polymorphism that was most significantly associated with ARMD is a T→C substitution that results in a tyrosine-to-histidine substitution of the CFH protein. Thus, it appears that in affected individuals, RPE cells may undergo damage via the complement system because of their inability to inhibit the complement cascade as effectively. Additional indirect evidence in support of this chain of events is noted by a publication that indicates that choroidal levels of C-reactive protein are elevated in homozygote CFH polymorphic individuals. [ Some studies have dileneated a molecular pathway leading to geographic atrophy and visual loss. This pathway indicates that RPE death leads to secondary photoreceptor loss and consequent visual loss over time. Ambati et al found that RPE cells in patients with dry ARMD have low levels of a RNA-cleaving enzyme, DICER1. Low levels of this enzyme lead to decreased breakdown of RNA-Alu molecules. Overabundance of cytoplasmic RNA-Alu molecules (non-coding sequences of RNA) activates inflammatory proteins (NLRP3 inflammosome), which activates a cascade of molecular responses that lead to RPE cell death. [ 
       Frequency 
         United States Age-related macular degeneration (ARMD) is the leading cause of blindness in the United States for people older than 50 years. The actual frequency of the disease depends on specific racial group studies. ARMD is more prevalent in whites and likely has a more severe course in patients who have light-colored eyes. A liberal definition of ARMD that includes all patients with significant drusen in the posterior pole, with or without visual loss, estimates the prevalence at greater than 20% of the population older than 60 years. A more rigorous, population-based survey with a definition that requires the presence of either late atrophy and/or choroidal neovascularization results in an incidence of 0% at age 50 years or younger, 2% at 70 years, and 6% at 80 years. In African Americans, dry ARMD is noted to be approximately half the incidence rate stated above. 
         International The incidence of age-related macular degeneration (ARMD) in Japanese and other Asian populations is lower than the white population in the United States, but reports suggest that the incidence is increasing. The Inuit people in Greenland have a significantly higher incidence, as well as a distinctive phenotype. Most black Africans and other people with darker-pigmented skin in general have a lower incidence of symptomatic macular degeneration. Similarly, it is evident that the lesions resulting from ARMD in Asian populations are different from those in white populations. This is in agreement with the most accepted theory regarding ARMD: that it is a multigenic inherited condition. The background and the specific gene affected would affect the phenotype.  
       Mortality/Morbidity 
         Age-related macular degeneration (ARMD) results in significant visual morbidity. The presence of neovascularization results in a blurry central visual field. Even in dry ARMD, with relatively good vision, patients often report trouble adjusting to varying light conditions. Often, these patients note difficulty when initially placed in a dark environment from a relatively lighted one (eg, entering a restaurant from bright sunlight). ARMD patients, especially those with the exudative variant, have a higher incidence of cerebrovascular accidents and cardiac disease. Geographic atrophy may also be associated with cognitive impairment, as assessed by mini-mental status exams and other similar tests. One case control study demonstrated a 3x increased odds for mild cognitive impairment in geographic atrophy subjects when compared to normal controls even when controlled for age, visual acuity and education level. [ [ [ 
         Race The incidence of age-related macular degeneration (ARMD) is higher in whites compared with African Americans. Some studies report a rate of approximately half in African West Indians in Barbados compared with whites in Baltimore, Maryland. The incidence in Asians is between the above 2 rates, although it appears that the incidence is increasing in this population. 
         Sex No known difference exists between males and females in the incidence of age-related macular degeneration (ARMD). 
         Age As implied by its name, the incidence of age-related macular degeneration (ARMD) is related to the age of the patient. The incidence increases with each decade of life, with a significant rise in patients aged 70 years or older.  
     Clinical Presentation 
       History 
         Patients with age-related macular degeneration (ARMD) usually report a family history of decreased vision late in life. 
           
             They often report difficulty with night vision and with changing light conditions. Specifically, patients report changes in Amsler grid self-evaluation and trouble with reading.  
             Commonly, ARMD patients report visual fluctuation (ie, days when vision is poor and other days when it appears improved). 
             Patients report difficulty with reading and making out faces. 
             Metamorphopsia is not a major complaint, but it may be present as the atrophy slowly progresses. 
       Physical 
         Funduscopic examination in age-related macular degeneration (ARMD) is significant for drusen in the early stages of disease. These drusen usually are confluent with significant pigment changes and accumulation of pigment in the posterior pole. RPE often appears atrophic with an easier visualization of the underlying choroidal plexus. 
           
             In advanced stages of dry ARMD, these focal islands of atrophy coalesce and form large zones of atrophy with severely affected vision.  
             Other signs of choroidal neovascularization include RPE elevation, exudate, or subretinal fluid. The presence of these symptoms may indicate that neovascularization is occurring and that fluorescein angiography may be indicated to evaluate the retina.  
             The periphery of patients with ARMD often has areas of drusen, as well as RPE mottling and atrophy. 
       Causes 
         Oxidative stress is believed to play a major role in the pathogenesis of age-related macular degeneration (ARMD) because of combined exposures of the retina to light and oxygen. Additionally, ARMD is now widely accepted as a genetically inherited disorder with late onset. Groundbreaking studies in the genetics of ARMD have changed the way in which most specialists perceive the disease. Specifically, a majority of the risk of developing ARMD is determined by variations in 3 specific genes, as follows: 
           
             CFH 
             BF C2 
             LOC Maller and others showed that polymorphisms in the above 3 genes independently raise the risk of ARMD. [ 
           
             Smoking and a higher body mass index are 2 of the most common other environmental factors that contribute independently to the increase in the risk of developing ARMD. Smoking has been clearly identified as increasing the risk of ARMD by 2 times.  
             Large studies have not shown hypertension or heart disease to increase the odds of developing ARMD. 
             Serum lipids were extensively studied in regard to their relationship with ARMD in the National Eye Institute–sponsored AREDS. One report suggests dietary total omega-3 long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acid (LCPUFA) intake was inversely associated with the development of neovascular ARMD (although not nonexudative ARMD). [ 
             A study looking at whether the regular consumption of omega-3 fatty acids and fish may affect the onset of ARMD in women found that incidence of the disease was significantly decreased among women who ate 1 or more servings of fish per week. [ 
             Studying twins with ARMD, Seddon and others arrived at some interesting conclusions. [ These studies have generally been performed in individuals from the United States of European descent. Thus, the results may not apply to individuals of other races.  
     Differential Diagnoses 
       
         Angioid Streaks 
         Best Disease 
         Chloroquine and Hydroxychloroquine Toxicity 
     Workup 
       Laboratory Studies 
         See the list below: 
           
             Fluorescein angiography is of value if the age-related macular degeneration (ARMD) patient notes a recent onset or worsening of vision associated with metamorphopsia. Metamorphopsia may indicate the onset of choroidal neovascularization. Clinical evidence for neovascularization includes retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) elevation, subretinal hemorrhage, and/or the presence of exudate.  
             Fluorescein angiography, as shown in the images below, is performed by injecting 3 mL of 25% sodium fluorescein in a peripheral vein, followed by a rapid sequence of angiography images. Fluorescein is a vegetable-based dye that is activated by light at a particular wavelength, which causes emission at a higher wavelength. Using the appropriate blocking and transmission filters, the photographer is able to capture an image of the dye in the blood vessels and, later, as the dye leaks, images of the retina and the choroid.  
             Some complications of fluorescein angiography may occur. The dye is relatively safe. Occasionally (< 5%), patients may have nausea or vomiting shortly after dye injection. Infrequently, patients may develop an allergic reaction to the dye and have hives, angioedema, venous dilation, and, very rarely, death (< 1/250,000). No cross-reactivity occurs between this dye and iodine. The dye is cleared by renal excretion and is safe in patients on dialysis. Note the images below.  
               In angiography, fluorescein dye is passed through a peripheral vein and transmits through the... In angiography, fluorescein dye is passed through a peripheral vein and transmits through the vascular system. The dye fluoresces in the vasculature, as seen here. No vascular prominences are seen in the macula or in any areas of dye pooling or staining. The abnormal vessels in the optic nerve, however, do show dye leakage.  
               Staining of drusen. Drusen absorb dye and, in the late frames of the angiogram, show... Staining of drusen. Drusen absorb dye and, in the late frames of the angiogram, show hyperfluorescence. This staining is distinguished from the leakage that occurs when the dye spreads outside the boundary of the lesion.  
               The atrophic retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) demonstrates staining of the underlying choroidal... The atrophic retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) demonstrates staining of the underlying choroidal vasculature. Normally, the intact RPE masks the presence of choroidal fluorescence. However, when the RPE atrophies, the underlying dye appears as an area of hyperfluorescence in the early stages of angiography. In the late stages, the drusen lose fluorescence in concert with (or with a small time lag) the rest of the retinal layers.  
               The atrophic areas are easily distinguished by the hyperfluorescence of the retinal pigment... The atrophic areas are easily distinguished by the hyperfluorescence of the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) in the mid phase of the angiogram. Hypofluorescence of dye, due to masking caused by the increased pigmentation, is seen. No areas of frank dye leakage or exudative age-related macular degeneration (ARMD) are apparent. A "hot cross bun" pattern of dry ARMD-related pigment changes is evident near the fovea.  
               Fluorescein angiogram 4 minutes after injection of dye on 67-year-old woman showing pigment... Fluorescein angiogram 4 minutes after injection of dye on 67-year-old woman showing pigment epithelial detachments.  
               A later frame of the angiogram demonstrating the absence of dye leakage outside the lesion, with... A later frame of the angiogram demonstrating the absence of dye leakage outside the lesion, with staining of the areas of atrophy (window defects) in the macular region.  
       Imaging Studies 
         See the list below: 
           
             Dry age-related macular degeneration (ARMD) is followed best by accurate fundus photography, images of which are shown below. 
               A normal-appearing macula of the left eye. Note the even pigmentation of the retinal pigment... A normal-appearing macula of the left eye. Note the even pigmentation of the retinal pigment epithelium and the absence of any yellow excrescences (drusen) in the fovea. The optic nerve has unrelated changes.  
               Moderate nonexudative age-related macular degeneration is shown with the presence of drusen (... Moderate nonexudative age-related macular degeneration is shown with the presence of drusen (yellow deposits) in the macular region.  
               A more advanced case of nonexudative age-related macular degeneration (ARMD). This image shows... A more advanced case of nonexudative age-related macular degeneration (ARMD). This image shows drusen that are larger, more confluent, and soft. Soft drusen are defined as drusen that have indistinct borders. Such drusen are more likely to convert to wet ARMD. A few areas of atrophy are noted, where the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) has lost pigmentation. The retinal cells overlying atrophic RPE are generally nonfunctional and result in a scotoma.  
               A more advanced case of dry age-related macular degeneration. Several areas of atrophy are... A more advanced case of dry age-related macular degeneration. Several areas of atrophy are present, as are areas of significant pigment mottling in the macula. The large drusen inferior to fixation are poorly distinguished from each other.  
               Fundus photo showing drusen in a 67-year-old woman with dry age-related macular degeneration.  Fundus photo showing drusen in a 67-year-old woman with dry age-related macular degeneration.  
             Performing tests (eg, fluorescein angiography) on a routine basis is not necessary. 
             The physician is sometimes at a quandary when a patient describes loss of vision or new onset of metamorphopsia. The patient sometimes notes such changes as geographic atrophy (GA) progresses; unfortunately, it is almost impossible to discern these symptoms from the symptoms that occur when neovascularization has occurred. Therefore, a patient with a new onset of metamorphopsia or a sudden decrease in vision may require a fluorescein angiogram to distinguish exudative ARMD versus the indeterminable progression of GA.  
       Other Tests 
         See the list below: 
           
             Reports on age-related macular degeneration (ARMD) have examined the thickness of the retina with optical coherence tomography (OCT). This study has shown decreased reflectance at the level of the rod-cone layer indicating that atrophy is present in this layer. Note the images below.  
               High-definition optical coherence tomography scan of a 67-year-old woman showing retinal pigment... High-definition optical coherence tomography scan of a 67-year-old woman showing retinal pigment epithelium mottling and pigment epithelial detachments temporal to fixation consistent with dry macular degeneration.  
               High definition optical coherence tomography right eye demonstrating retinal pigment epithelium... High definition optical coherence tomography right eye demonstrating retinal pigment epithelium atrophy and changes in the deeper layers of retina. The absence of intraretinal cysts, subretinal fluid, or sub-retinal pigment epithelium fluid indicates the absence of wet age-related macular degeneration.  
             Multifocal electroretinography (MERG) may be performed on the retina to evaluate the functional response of rods and cones. 
             The above 2 tests are not required in the evaluation of ARMD, but they have been performed by various authors to follow the progression of disease.  
       Procedures 
         See the list below: 
           
             Amsler grid evaluation, slit-lamp biomicroscopy, and fluorescein angiography in age-related macular degeneration (ARMD)  
               
                 The cornerstone of evaluation of dry ARMD consists of visual acuity measurement and evaluation by Amsler grid. The biggest treatable risk of visual loss in dry ARMD is the development of neovascularization. Studies have shown Amsler grid evaluations, if performed properly, are quite sensitive in detecting change. The specificity of this test is somewhat limited. Patients with dry ARMD often note Amsler grid changes that are temporary, and good observers can detect progression of their dry ARMD on the grid.  
                 New metamorphopsia is a good indication for performing fluorescein angiography. This test is the most sensitive and specific way to evaluate for choroidal neovascularization.  
       Histologic Findings 
         The earliest morphologic features of dry age-related macular degeneration (ARMD) consist of the accumulation of 2 kinds of lesions (ie, basal laminar deposits, basal linear deposits) just beneath the RPE layer. The accumulation of these deposits is often uneven and associated with RPE hyperplasia and migration. This condition is clinically evident as pigment clumping. As these deposits slowly increase, they can be seen as soft drusen and/or localized RPE detachments. As these drusen enlarge, they can cause the development of new blood vessels (wet ARMD) and/or the slow demise of the overlying photoreceptor cells. Photoreceptor cell loss can be accompanied by the thinning (atrophy) of RPE cells, as well as underlying choroidal circulation. The end stage of these changes is the presence of a very thin choroidal layer with the absence of small choroidal vessels underlying an area of atrophic RPE. The rod-cone layer overlying this zone is atrophied, and the middle retinal layers show signs of degeneration. This end stage gradually enlarges and is seen clinically as GA.  
     Treatment & Management 
       Medical Care 
         See the list below: 
           
             Role of vitamins, antioxidants, risk of smoking, and hypertension [ 
               
                 Evidence shows that patients with early or moderate dry age-related macular degeneration (ARMD) should consume adequate quantities of antioxidants, including vitamin A, vitamin E, zinc, and lutein. Prevention is the best treatment in this case because no satisfactory method exists to treat dry ARMD. Accumulated evidence suggests that ARMD is a genetic disease. Therefore, children of patients who have lost vision to ARMD are the best candidates for a primary prevention trial.  
                 The first Age-Related Eye Diseases Study (AREDS) has concluded, and its results are illuminating. In this study, patients with very mild or moderate forms of dry ARMD were given antioxidant supplementation (15 mg of beta-carotene, 500 mg of vitamin C, 400 IU of vitamin E, 80 mg of zinc, plus 2 mg of copper). These patients had a small but definite decrease in their progression to advanced ARMD. Interestingly, the data showed benefit in preventing the conversion of dry ARMD to neovascular ARMD.  
                 A study by Millen et al examined the relationship between serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25[OH]D) levels and the prevalence of ARMD. [ 
                 The Rotterdam Study (1990–1993) investigated whether regular dietary intake of antioxidants was associated with a lower risk of developing ARMD in more than 4000 persons aged 55 years or older in The Netherlands. In this study, a high dietary intake of beta-carotene, vitamins C and E, and zinc was also associated with a substantially reduced risk of ARMD in elderly persons.  
                 Some evidence indicates that multivitamins with antioxidants and lutein may be of benefit. Clear evidence shows that smoking accelerates the disease process. It is recommended that patients who have a family history of ARMD, and specifically those patients whose first-degree relative has lost vision due to ARMD, should take a multivitamin with lutein each day. It is advised that patients stop smoking and consider supplemental oral antioxidants if they are unable to stop smoking.  
                 Controversy exists over the exact vitamin combination that may be beneficial. Zinc and vitamin E are commonly touted as providing the best benefits. One study reports the beneficial effects of zinc, while another study shows a worse outcome with large doses of zinc. Therefore, it would be prudent to take a multivitamin containing a moderate dose of these vitamins.  
                 To further refine the specific benefits of antioxidants, a randomized controlled clinical trial,  Age-Related Eye Disease Study 2 (AREDS2) 
                 Observational epidemiologic studies indicate a direct association between homocysteine concentration in the blood and the risk of ARMD. The objective of the Women’s Antioxidant and Folic Acid Cardiovascular Study was to examine the incidence of ARMD in a trial of combined folic acid, pyridoxine hydrochloride, and cyanocobalamin. [ 
                 No specific data are available on the combined benefits of an AREDS-supplemented diet with the use of the above vitamins. Therefore, awaiting the results of the AREDS2 study would be of benefit.  
                 The purpose of the Cardiovascular Health and its Association with Prevalence and Progression of Age-Related Macular Degeneration (CHARM) study was to determine if cardiovascular health, as determined by novel noninvasive techniques, was associated with prevalent ARMD or ARMD progression. [ 
                 Epidemiologic studies using a computer database previously indicated that the use of statins was protective against the development of ARMD. However, a 2007 study, using rigorous systems and graded macular photographs, confirmed that the use of statins was not correlated with ARMD incidence or progression. [ 
             Early symptoms  
               
                 Prolonged darkness (delayed dark adaptation) upon entering a restaurant from bright sunlight is one of the earliest symptoms, with patients noting this phenomenon prior to the presence of any significant atrophy. One effective suggestion for patients with this symptom is to use wrap-around shades. Some low-vision specialists suggest the use of orange-tinted, blue-blocker lenses.  
                 Patients with dry ARMD often have a visual function that is much poorer than suggested by their Snellen acuity. The presence of large areas of atrophy, usually in a perifoveal zone, results in large scotomas near the center of the visual field. These scotomas prevent patients from performing simple tasks (eg, recognizing faces, reading). Low-vision specialists often prescribe magnifiers with a line marker so that patients do not lose their place while reading.  
             Family members of patients with ARMD  
               
                 While it would seem logical that the same vitamins used to treat patients with ARMD would be of benefit prior to the development of ARMD in family members, in the AREDS, supplements did not show any significant benefit with treatment over the 7-year follow-up when the disease was very mild. Additionally, many risks are associated with long-term zinc, vitamin A, and vitamin E supplementation. Instead, family members of patients with ARMD should do the following:  
                   
                     Do not smoke and avoid second-hand smoke. 
                     Protect eyes from direct sunlight using either dark glasses or a wide-brimmed hat. 
                     Eat a well-balanced diet high in natural antioxidants. 
                     Eat fresh baked fish (1-2 servings) daily. 
                     Eat green leafy vegetables (eg, spinach, kale) daily. 
                     Consider a supplement consisting of folic acid (2.5 mg/d), pyridoxine (50 mg/d), and cyanocobalamin (1 mg/d). [ 
                 Family members should be specifically requested NOT to take the AREDS supplement vitamins because the risk associated with long-term supplementation with these vitamins may not overcome the benefits of taking them. For example, in subjects with 1 risk factor in the AREDS, the race of progression of disease at 5 years was minimally different from that of the placebo-treated subjects. This also held true at 10 years. Subjects with more risk factors (2-4) had progressively increased levels of benefit with supplementation.  
             Clinical guideline summaries  
               
                 American Academy of Ophthalmology Retina/Vitreous Panel - Age-related Macular Degeneration 
                 US Preventive Services Task Force - Screening for impaired visual acuity in older adults: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement 
                 National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) - Ranibizumab and pegaptanib for the treatment of age-related macular degeneration 
       Surgical Care 
         No accepted surgical alternative to dry age-related macular degeneration (ARMD) is available. It is possible that the drusen present in dry ARMD can be ameliorated by the performance of a very light grid laser therapy. [ More recently, a few patients underwent retinal translocation surgery during which the retina is rotated. Many of these patients developed accelerated dry macular degeneration with retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) atrophy at the site of the new macula. Interestingly, the area of atrophy that developed at the new site resembled almost identically the area of atrophy that was preexistent prior to the translocation. This provides clinical evidence that the RPE layer is source of disease pathophysiology and that the retinal atrophy that results is a response to diseased RPE. A phase II study using encapsulated, genetically modified cells that secrete ciliary neurotrophic factor indicated the retinal thickening occurred in a dose-dependent, statistically significant manner. Treated subjects also had a higher percentage of preserved vision. Additional studies are required prior to approval by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Isolated reports of both embryonic and adult-derived stem cells being placed in the subretinal space have been noted. These are small reports whose primary purpose was to determine the feasibility of such an endeavor. In the near future, RPE cell repair via external transplantation of stem cells may provide a reasonable method of treatment for those patients with severe disease.  
       Consultations 
         Serial general ophthalmologic examination, on a nonemergent basis, is indicated for patients with dry age-related macular degeneration (ARMD). If these patients have an acute loss of vision, retina consultation with fluorescein angiography is indicated in a timely manner to rule out the possibility of conversion to wet ARMD. Patients who have significant ARMD changes, with or without vision loss, may wish to have their children evaluated by an ophthalmologist once the children reach age 50 years.  
       Diet 
         Evidence suggests that diet plays an important role in the prevention of dry age-related macular degeneration (ARMD). [ 
       Activity 
         No limitations are noted for age-related macular degeneration (ARMD). Each state has specific visual-acuity criteria for driving with a private license. Commercial driving licenses typically require at least 20/40 vision in the worse eye and have other typical requirements for side vision.  
     Medication 
       Medication Summary Currently, no approved drug treatment of dry age-related macular degeneration (ARMD) is available. See Surgical Care for the possible beneficial effects of laser therapy. 
     Follow-up 
       Further Outpatient Care 
         See the list below: 
           
             Patients with dry age-related macular degeneration (ARMD) should be observed frequently. Their follow-up care should be determined by the extent of disease and by the ophthalmologist's assessment of risk of conversion to wet ARMD.  
             Daily Amsler grid evaluation is necessary, with immediate reports to the ophthalmologist of any changes are noted. 
       Inpatient & Outpatient Medications 
         See the list below: 
           
             No approved medications for the treatment of dry age-related macular degeneration (ARMD) are available. 
       Complications 
         See the list below: 
           
             The major complication of dry age-related macular degeneration (ARMD) is the conversion to wet (or exudative/neovascular) ARMD.  
       Prognosis 
         See the list below: 
           
             Prognosis for this disease is significantly better than the prognosis for wet age-related macular degeneration (ARMD). Patients likely will have steadily but slowly deteriorating visual acuity. It also is common to have other visual dysfunction (eg, loss of ability to quickly adapt to changing lighting conditions, loss of contrast sensitivity). Variability of vision from day-to-day is common.  
       Patient Education 
         See the list below: 
           
             Patients with geographic atrophy (GA) may have a variety of visual dysfunction. The location of atrophy often suggests the type of visual dysfunction that will be experienced by the patient. Many patients with age-related macular degeneration (ARMD) report difficulty in adjusting to changing light conditions; specifically, they take a significantly longer time to adjust to indoor lighting after being outside in bright sunlight. Wrap-around outdoor sunglasses that have an orange tint work for some patients.  
             Patients who primarily have central atrophy often note trouble with reading and performing fine motor tasks. Magnification and increased contrast (via a monitor or increased illumination) are the best solutions for such visual dysfunction.  
             In contrast, other patients have GA that spares the foveal center but affects the entire perifoveal region. These patients often can see 20/20, but they are unable to navigate due to the small area of good visual acuity. Some of these patients have to scan the screen to be able to see the 20/400 character. In these patients, excess magnification would be detrimental, because it would effectively decrease their limited visual field. Increased contrast and minification, by way of increased illumination and reverse telescopes respectively, may be beneficial for these patients.  
             Referral to comprehensive vision rehabilitation is indicated early in the disease process. The American Academy of Ophthalmology (AAO) recommends referral for vision rehabilitation when acuity is less than 20/40 or when a loss of contrast sensitivity, scotoma, or field loss is noted. The aim of early referral is to prevent the many negative consequences of vision loss. For example, when acuity is reduced to 20/50 or worse, patients have twice the risk of falling, 3 times the risk of depression, and 4 or greater times the risk of hip fracture. Rehabilitation aims to maximize patients’ use of their partial vision and to provide practical adaptation to reduce disability. Comprehensive rehabilitation addresses the “whole person,” as outlined in the AAO’s booklet of  Vision Rehabilitation for Adults [ 
             For patient education resources, see the  Eye and Vision Center Macular Degeneration 
     start media 
       
         A normal-appearing macula of the left eye. Note the even pigmentation of the retinal pigment... A normal-appearing macula of the left eye. Note the even pigmentation of the retinal pigment epithelium and the absence of any yellow excrescences (drusen) in the fovea. The optic nerve has unrelated changes.  
       
         In angiography, fluorescein dye is passed through a peripheral vein and transmits through the... In angiography, fluorescein dye is passed through a peripheral vein and transmits through the vascular system. The dye fluoresces in the vasculature, as seen here. No vascular prominences are seen in the macula or in any areas of dye pooling or staining. The abnormal vessels in the optic nerve, however, do show dye leakage.  
       
         Moderate nonexudative age-related macular degeneration is shown with the presence of drusen (... Moderate nonexudative age-related macular degeneration is shown with the presence of drusen (yellow deposits) in the macular region.  
       
         Staining of drusen. Drusen absorb dye and, in the late frames of the angiogram, show... Staining of drusen. Drusen absorb dye and, in the late frames of the angiogram, show hyperfluorescence. This staining is distinguished from the leakage that occurs when the dye spreads outside the boundary of the lesion.  
       
         A more advanced case of nonexudative age-related macular degeneration (ARMD). This image shows... A more advanced case of nonexudative age-related macular degeneration (ARMD). This image shows drusen that are larger, more confluent, and soft. Soft drusen are defined as drusen that have indistinct borders. Such drusen are more likely to convert to wet ARMD. A few areas of atrophy are noted, where the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) has lost pigmentation. The retinal cells overlying atrophic RPE are generally nonfunctional and result in a scotoma.  
       
         The atrophic retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) demonstrates staining of the underlying choroidal... The atrophic retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) demonstrates staining of the underlying choroidal vasculature. Normally, the intact RPE masks the presence of choroidal fluorescence. However, when the RPE atrophies, the underlying dye appears as an area of hyperfluorescence in the early stages of angiography. In the late stages, the drusen lose fluorescence in concert with (or with a small time lag) the rest of the retinal layers.  
       
         A more advanced case of dry age-related macular degeneration. Several areas of atrophy are... A more advanced case of dry age-related macular degeneration. Several areas of atrophy are present, as are areas of significant pigment mottling in the macula. The large drusen inferior to fixation are poorly distinguished from each other.  
       
         The atrophic areas are easily distinguished by the hyperfluorescence of the retinal pigment... The atrophic areas are easily distinguished by the hyperfluorescence of the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) in the mid phase of the angiogram. Hypofluorescence of dye, due to masking caused by the increased pigmentation, is seen. No areas of frank dye leakage or exudative age-related macular degeneration (ARMD) are apparent. A "hot cross bun" pattern of dry ARMD-related pigment changes is evident near the fovea.  
       
         High-definition optical coherence tomography scan of a 67-year-old woman showing retinal pigment... High-definition optical coherence tomography scan of a 67-year-old woman showing retinal pigment epithelium mottling and pigment epithelial detachments temporal to fixation consistent with dry macular degeneration.  
       
         Fundus photo showing drusen in a 67-year-old woman with dry age-related macular degeneration.  Fundus photo showing drusen in a 67-year-old woman with dry age-related macular degeneration.  
       
         Fluorescein angiogram 4 minutes after injection of dye on 67-year-old woman showing pigment... Fluorescein angiogram 4 minutes after injection of dye on 67-year-old woman showing pigment epithelial detachments.  
       
         A later frame of the angiogram demonstrating the absence of dye leakage outside the lesion, with... A later frame of the angiogram demonstrating the absence of dye leakage outside the lesion, with staining of the areas of atrophy (window defects) in the macular region.  
       
         High definition optical coherence tomography right eye demonstrating retinal pigment epithelium... High definition optical coherence tomography right eye demonstrating retinal pigment epithelium atrophy and changes in the deeper layers of retina. The absence of intraretinal cysts, subretinal fluid, or sub-retinal pigment epithelium fluid indicates the absence of wet age-related macular degeneration.  
     
       Author 
         Raj K Maturi, MD Private Practice in Vitreoretinal Diseases, Surgery, and Uveitis; Volunteer Clinical Associate Professor, Department of Ophthalmology, Indiana University School of Medicine Raj K Maturi, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American Academy of Ophthalmology American Society of Retina Specialists Society of Heed Fellows Indiana Academy of Ophthalmology Disclosure: Received grant/research funds from Allergan for consulting; Received consulting fee from DRCR/National Eye Institute, NIH for consulting; Received grant/research funds from LUX, Inc for consulting; Received grant/research funds from DRCR/JAEB for none; Received consulting fee from ALIMERA for consulting; Received consulting fee from ALCON for consulting; Received consulting fee from GLAXOSMITHKLINE for consulting; Received consulting fee from QUARK PHARMACEUTICALS for consulting; Received consul. 
       Pharmacy Editor 
         Simon K Law, MD, PharmD Clinical Professor of Health Sciences, Department of Ophthalmology, Jules Stein Eye Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, David Geffen School of Medicine Simon K Law, MD, PharmD is a member of the following medical societies:  American Academy of Ophthalmology Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology American Glaucoma Society Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Managing Editor 
         Steve Charles, MD Director of Charles Retina Institute; Clinical Professor, Department of Ophthalmology, University of Tennessee College of Medicine Steve Charles, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American Academy of Ophthalmology American Society of Retina Specialists Macula Society Retina Society Club Jules Gonin Disclosure: Received royalty and consulting fees  for: Alcon Laboratories. 
       Chief Editor 
         Hampton Roy, Sr, MD Associate Clinical Professor, Department of Ophthalmology, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences Hampton Roy, Sr, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American Academy of Ophthalmology American College of Surgeons Pan-American Association of Ophthalmology Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Additional Contributors 
         Brian A Phillpotts, MD, MD Brian A Phillpotts, MD, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American Academy of Ophthalmology American Diabetes Association American Medical Association National Medical Association Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
     
       American Academy of Ophthalmology (AAO) Retina/Vitreous Panel. Age-related macular degeneration. AAO; San Francisco, Calif; 2008. Available at  http://guideline.gov/content.aspx?id=14275 
       Blodi BA. Nutritional supplements in the prevention of age-related macular degeneration.  Insight [Medline] 
       Dashti N, McGwin G, Owsley C, Curcio CA. Plasma apolipoproteins and risk for age related maculopathy.  Br J Ophthalmol [Medline] 
       Evans JR, Lawrenson JG. Antioxidant vitamin and mineral supplements for preventing age-related macular degeneration.  Cochrane Database Syst Rev [Medline] 
       Christen WG,  Glynn RJ, Chew EY, Albert CM, Manson JE. Folic acaid, pyridoxine, and cyanocobalamin combination treatment and age-related macular degeneration in women: the Women's Antioxidant and Folic Acid Cardiovasacular Study.  Arch intern Med 
       [Guideline] Ferris FL, Davis MD, Clemons TE, et al. A simplified severity scale for age-related macular degeneration: AREDS Report No. 18.  Arch Ophthalmol [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Johnson PT, Betts KE, Radeke MJ, Hageman GS, Anderson DH, Johnson LV. Individuals homozygous for the age-related macular degeneration risk-conferring variant of complement factor H have elevated levels of CRP in the choroid.  Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A [Medline] 
       Tarallo V,  Hirano Y,  Gelfand BD,  Dridi S,  Kerur N,  Kim Y, et al. DICER1 loss and Alu RNA induce age-related macular degeneration via the NLRP3 inflammasome and MyD88.  Cell [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Kaneko H,  Dridi S,  Tarallo V,  Gelfand BD,  Fowler BJ,  Cho WG, et al. DICER1 deficit induces Alu RNA toxicity in age-related macular degeneration.  Nature [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Clemons TE, Rankin MW, McBee WL. Cognitive impairment in the Age-Related Eye Disease Study: AREDS report no. 16.  Arch Ophthalmol [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Baker ML,  Wang JJ,  Rogers S,  Klein R,  Kuller LH,  Larsen EK, et al. Early age-related macular degeneration, cognitive function, and dementia: the Cardiovascular Health Study.  Arch Ophthalmol [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Maller J, George S, Purcell S, et al. Common variation in three genes, including a noncoding variant in CFH, strongly influences risk of age-related macular degeneration.  Nat Genet [Medline] 
       SanGiovanni JP, Chew EY, Clemons TE, et al. The relationship of dietary lipid intake and age-related macular degeneration in a case-control study: AREDS Report No. 20.  Arch Ophthalmol [Medline] 
       Christen WG, Schaumberg DA, Glynn RJ, Buring JE. Dietary {omega}-3 Fatty Acid and Fish Intake and Incident Age-Related Macular Degeneration in Women.  Arch Ophthalmol [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Seddon JM, George S, Rosner B. Cigarette smoking, fish consumption, omega-3 fatty acid intake, and associations with age-related macular degeneration: the US Twin Study of Age-Related Macular Degeneration.  Arch Ophthalmol [Medline] 
       Hawkins BS, Bird A, Klein R, West SK. Epidemiology of age-related macular degeneration.  Mol Vis [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Millen AE,  Voland R,  Sondel SA,  Parekh N,  Horst RL,  Wallace RB, et al. Vitamin D Status and Early Age-Related Macular Degeneration in Postmenopausal Women.  Arch Ophthalmol [Medline] [Full Text] 
       McCarty CA, Dowrick A, Cameron J, et al. Novel Measure of Cardiovascular Health and its Association with Prevalence and Progression of Age-Related Macular Degeneration: The CHARM Study.  BMC Ophthalmology 
       Klein R, Knudtson MD, Klein BE. Statin use and the five-year incidence and progression of age-related macular degeneration.  Am J Ophthalmol [Medline] 
       Eter N, Krohne TU, Holz FG. New pharmacologic approaches to therapy for age-related macular degeneration.  BioDrugs [Medline] 
       Bartlett H, Eperjesi F. Age-related macular degeneration and nutritional supplementation: a review of randomised controlled trials.  Ophthalmic Physiol Opt [Medline] 
       Jackson ML. Vision Rehabilitation Services.  Medscape Ophthalmology [Full Text] 
       Bird AC, Bressler NM, Bressler SB, et al. An international classification and grading system for age-related maculopathy and age-related macular degeneration. The International ARM Epidemiological Study Group.  Surv Ophthalmol [Medline] 
       Christen WG, Glynn RJ, Chew EY, Albert CM, Manson JE. Folic acid, pyridoxine, and cyanocobalamin combination treatment and age-related macular degeneration in women: the Women''s Antioxidant and Folic Acid Cardiovascular Study.  Arch Intern Med [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Christen WG, Glynn RJ, Chew EY, Albert CM, Manson JE. Folic acid, pyridoxine, and cyanocobalamin combination treatment and age-related macular degeneration in women: the Women''s Antioxidant and Folic Acid Cardiovascular Study.  Arch Intern Med [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Christen WG, Glynn RJ, Chew EY, Albert CM, Manson JE. Folic acid, pyridoxine, and cyanocobalamin combination treatment and age-related macular degeneration in women: the Women''s Antioxidant and Folic Acid Cardiovascular Study.  Arch Intern Med [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Christen WG, Glynn RJ, Chew EY, Albert CM, Manson JE. Folic acid, pyridoxine, and cyanocobalamin combination treatment and age-related macular degeneration in women: the Women''s Antioxidant and Folic Acid Cardiovascular Study.  Arch Intern Med [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Coleman H, Chew E. Nutritional supplementation in age-related macular degeneration.  Curr Opin Ophthalmol [Medline] 
       Comer GM, Ciulla TA, Criswell MH, Tolentino M. Current and future treatment options for nonexudative and exudative age-related macular degeneration.  Drugs Aging [Medline] 
       Evans JR. Antioxidant vitamin and mineral supplements for slowing the progression of age-related macular degeneration.  Cochrane Database Syst Rev [Medline] 
       Garibaldi DC, Zhang K. Molecular genetics of macular degeneration.  Int Ophthalmol Clin [Medline] 
       Helwick C. MAHALO finds new biomarker for dry macular degeneration. Medscape Medical News. November 21, 2013. Available at  http://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/81482 
       Luibl V, Isas JM, Kayed R, Glabe CG, Langen R, Chen J. Drusen deposits associated with aging and age-related macular degeneration contain nonfibrillar amyloid oligomers.  J Clin Invest [Medline] 
       Lutty G, Grunwald J, Majji AB, Uyama M, Yoneya S. Changes in choriocapillaris and retinal pigment epithelium in age-related macular degeneration.  Mol Vis [Medline] [Full Text] 
       McBee WL, Lindblad AS, Ferris FL 3rd. Who should receive oral supplement treatment for age-related macular degeneration?.  Curr Opin Ophthalmol [Medline] 
       Mitchell P, Smith W, Attebo K, Wang JJ. Prevalence of age-related maculopathy in Australia. The Blue Mountains Eye Study.  Ophthalmology [Medline] 
       Regillo CD.  Lampalizumab (anti-factor D) in patients with geographic atrophy: the MAHALO phase II results. Presented at: The American Academy of Ophthalmology (AAO) 2013 Annual Meeting; November 16, 2013; New Orleans, La.  
       Schmidt-Erfurth U. Nutrition and retina.  Dev Ophthalmol [Medline] 
       Sunness JS. The natural history of geographic atrophy, the advanced atrophic form  of age-related macular degeneration.  Mol Vis [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Winkler BS, Boulton ME, Gottsch JD, Sternberg P. Oxidative damage and age-related macular degeneration.  Mol Vis [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Woo SJ,  Park KH,  Ahn J,  Choe JY,  Jeong H,  Han JW, et al. Cognitive Impairment in Age-related Macular Degeneration and Geographic Atrophy.  Ophthalmology [Medline]

Article 2:

   
     Atrial Septal Defect 
       Atrial Septal Defect: Problem, Epidemiology, Etiology Atrial Septal Defect Workup: Laboratory Studies, Imaging Studies, Other Tests Atrial Septal Defect Treatment & Management: Medical Therapy, Surgical Therapy, Postoperative Details 
       Atrial Septal Defect: Problem, Epidemiology, Etiology Atrial Septal Defect Workup: Laboratory Studies, Imaging Studies, Other Tests Atrial Septal Defect Treatment & Management: Medical Therapy, Surgical Therapy, Postoperative Details 
       Overview
 Problem Epidemiology Etiology Pathophysiology Presentation Indications Contraindications Workup
 Laboratory Studies Imaging Studies Other Tests Diagnostic Procedures Treatment
 Medical Therapy Surgical Therapy Postoperative Details Follow-up Complications Outcome and Prognosis Future and Controversies 
       Atrial Septal Defect Overview Atrial Septal Defect Workup Atrial Septal Defect Treatment 162914-overview Dec 19, 2014 2015-08-04-20:27 0 Cardiology 2002 Diseases & Conditions Condition 
       1 2 content 162914 502 5000584 2 ssg 
     Jun 04, 2015 
       condition Diseases & Conditions 
       cardiology Cardiology 
       cardiology_congenital Congenital Heart Disease in the Adult atrial septal defect, atrial septum defect, ASD, atrial septal defect repair, atrial septal defect closure, atrial septal defect surgery, atrial septal defect symptoms Atrial septal defect (ASD) is one of the more commonly recognized congenital cardiac anomalies presenting in adulthood. Atrial septal defect is characterized by a defect in the interatrial septum allowing pulmonary venous return from the left atrium to pass directly to the right atrium. 0 
       ASD Atrial Septal Defect 
     Overview 
       Problem 
         Atrial septal defect (ASD) is one of the more commonly recognized congenital cardiac anomalies presenting in adulthood. Atrial septal defect is characterized by a defect in the interatrial septum allowing pulmonary venous return from the left atrium to pass directly to the right atrium. Depending on the size of the defect, size of the shunt, and associated anomalies, this can result in a spectrum of disease from no significant cardiac sequelae to right-sided volume overload, pulmonary arterial hypertension, and even atrial arrhythmias. With the routine use of echocardiography, the incidence of atrial septal defect is increased compared to earlier incidence studies using catheterization, surgery, or autopsy for diagnosis. [ 
       Epidemiology 
         Frequency The 3 major types of atrial septal defect (ASD) account for 10% of all congenital heart disease and as much as 20-40% of congenital heart disease presenting in adulthood. The most common types of ASD include the following: 
           
             Ostium secundum: The most common type of ASD accounting for 75% of all ASD cases, representing approximately 7% of all congenital cardiac defects and 30-40% of all congenital heart disease in patients older than 40 years.  
             Ostium primum: The second most common type of ASD accounts for 15-20% of all ASDs. Primum ASD is a form of atrioventricular septal defect and is commonly associated with mitral valve abnormalities.  
             Sinus venosus: The least common of the three, sinus venosus (SV) ASD is seen in 5-10% of all ASDs. The defect is located along the superior aspect of the atrial septum. Anomalous connection of the right-sided pulmonary veins is common and should be expected. Alternate imaging is generally required.  Sex: Age: 
       Etiology 
         Atrial septal defect (ASD) is a congenital cardiac disorder caused by the spontaneous malformation of the interatrial septum. 
           
             Ostium secundum ASD: This type of ASD results from incomplete adhesion between the flap valve associated with the foramen ovale and the septum secundum after birth. The patent foramen ovale usually results from abnormal resorption of the septum primum during the formation of the foramen secundum. Resorption in abnormal locations causes a fenestrated or netlike septum primum. Excessive resorption of the septum primum results in a short septum primum that does not close the foramen ovale. An abnormally large foramen ovale can occur as a result of defective development of the septum secundum. The normal septum primum does not close this type of abnormal foramen ovale at birth. A combination of excessive resorption of the septum primum and a large foramen ovale produces a large ostium secundum ASD.  
             Ostium primum ASD: These defects are caused by incomplete fusion of septum primum with the endocardial cushion. The defect lies immediately adjacent to the atrioventricular (AV) valves, either of which may be deformed and incompetent. In most cases, only the anterior or septal leaflet of the mitral valve is displaced, and it is commonly cleft. The tricuspid valve is usually not involved.  
             Sinus venosus ASD: Abnormal fusion between the embryologic sinus venosus and the atrium causes these defects. In most cases, the defect lies superior in the atrial septum near the entry of superior vena cava. Often there is associated anomalous drainage of the right superior pulmonary vein. The relatively uncommon inferior type is associated with partial anomalous drainage of the right inferior pulmonary vein. Anomalous drainage can be into the right atrium, the superior vena cava, or the inferior vena cava.  
             Coronary sinus ASD: Coronary sinus defect is characterized by unroofed coronary sinus and persistent left superior vena cava that drains into the left atrium. A dilated coronary sinus often suggests this defect. This can result is desaturation due to right-to-left shunt into the left atrium. The diagnosis can be made by injecting contrast agent into left upper extremity; coronary sinus opacification precedes right atrial opacification.  
         Genetics Atrial septal defect (ASD) may occur on a familial basis. Holt-Oram syndrome characterized by an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance and deformities of the upper limbs (most often, absent or hypoplastic radii) has been attributed to a single gene defect in TBX5. [ Ellis van Creveld syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder associated with skeletal dysplasia characterized by short limbs, short ribs, postaxial polydactyly, dysplastic nails and teeth, and a common atrium, occurring in 60% of affected individuals. [ Mutations in the cardiac transcription factor NKX2.5 have been attributed to the syndrome familial ASD associated with progressive atrioventricular block. [ 
       Pathophysiology 
         The magnitude of the left-to-right shunt across the ASD depends on the defect size, the relative compliance of the ventricles, and the relative resistance in both the pulmonary and systemic circulation. With small ASD, left atrial pressure may exceed right atrial pressure by several millimeters of mercury, whereas with large ASD, mean atrial pressures are nearly identical. Shunting across the interatrial septum is usually left-to-right and occurs predominantly in late ventricular systole and early diastole. Likely some augmentation occurs during atrial contraction. Note, however, that a transient and small right-to-left shunt can occur, especially during respiratory periods of decreasing intrathoracic pressure, even in the absence of pulmonary arterial hypertension. The chronic left-to-right shunt results in increased pulmonary blood flow and diastolic overload of the right ventricle. Resistance in the pulmonary vascular bed is commonly normal in children with ASD, and the volume load is usually well tolerated even though pulmonary blood flow may be more than 2 times systemic blood flow. Altered ventricular compliance with age can result in an increased left-to-right shunt contributing to symptoms. The chronic significant left-to-right shunt can alter the pulmonary vascular resistance leading to pulmonary arterial hypertension, even reversal of shunt and Eisenmenger syndrome. Because of an increase in plasma volume during pregnancy, shunt volume can increase, leading to symptoms. Pulmonary artery pressure usually remains normal. 
       Presentation 
         History: See the list below: 
           
             The atrial septal defect (ASD) malformation can go undiagnosed for decades due to subtle physical examination findings and a lack of symptoms.  
             Even isolated defects of moderate-to-large size may not cause symptoms in childhood. However, some may have symptoms of easy fatigability, recurrent respiratory infections, or exertional dyspnea. In childhood, the diagnosis is often considered after a heart murmur is detected on routine physical examination or after an abnormal finding is observed on chest radiographs or electrocardiogram (ECG).  
             If undetected in childhood, symptoms can develop gradually over decades and are largely the result of changing compliance with age, pulmonary arterial hypertension, atrial arrhythmias, and, sometimes, those associated with mitral valve disease in a primum ASD. Virtually all patients with ASD who survive beyond the sixth decade are symptomatic.  
             Clinical deterioration in older patients occurs by means of several mechanisms.  
               
                 First, an age-related decrease in left ventricular compliance augments the left-to-right shunt. 
                 Second, atrial arrhythmias, especially atrial fibrillation, but also atrial flutter or paroxysmal atrial tachycardia, increase in frequency after the fourth decade and can precipitate right ventricular failure.  
                 Third, most symptomatic adults older than 40 years have mild-to-moderate pulmonary arterial hypertension in the presence of a persistent large left-to-right shunt; therefore, the aging right ventricle is burdened by both pressure and volume overload.  
             Another mechanism for symptoms particularly associated with primum ASD is related to clinically significant mitral regurgitation. Its incidence, extent, and degree of dysfunction increases with age. Mitral valve insufficiency leads to further increase in left atrial pressure and a higher degree of left-to-right shunt.  
             Overall, the most common presenting symptoms include dyspnea, easy fatigability, palpitations, sustained atrial arrhythmia, syncope, stroke, and/or heart failure.  
             In adults, one of the most common symptoms is the development of palpitations related to atrial arrhythmias. 
         Physical: See the list below: 
           
             The findings on physical examination depend on the degree of left-to-right shunt and its hemodynamic consequences, which, in turn, depends on the size of the defect, the diastolic properties of both ventricles, and the relative resistance of the pulmonary and systemic circulations.  
             The patient can have a hyperdynamic right ventricular impulse due to increased diastolic filling and large stroke volume. 
             Palpable pulsation of the pulmonary artery and an ejection click can be detected because of a dilated pulmonary artery. 
             S 1 
             S 2 
             Blood flow across the ASD does not cause a murmur at the site of the shunt because no substantial pressure gradient exists between the atria. However, ASD with moderate-to-large left-to-right shunts result in increased right ventricular stroke volume across the pulmonary outflow tract creating a crescendo-decrescendo systolic ejection murmur. This murmur is heard in the second intercostal space at the upper left sternal border.  
             Patients with large left-to-right shunts often have a rumbling middiastolic murmur at the lower left sternal border because of increased flow across the tricuspid valve.  
             Auscultatory findings of the ASD may resemble those of mild valvular or infundibular pulmonic stenosis and idiopathic dilatation of the pulmonary artery. These disorders all manifest as a systolic ejection murmur, but they differ from the ASD by movement of the S 2 
             In patients with an ostium primum defect and an associated cleft of the mitral valve, an apical systolic regurgitant murmur of mitral regurgitation may be present.  
             In patients who develop pulmonary arterial hypertension and right ventricular hypertrophy, a right ventricular S 4 2 
             ASD is an acyanotic lesion. Thus, the patient should be normally saturated. In the rare case of severe pulmonary arterial hypertension, atrial shunt reversal (Eisenmenger syndrome) may occur, leading to cyanosis and clubbing.  
       Indications 
         The decision to repair any kind of atrial septal defect (ASD) is based on clinical and echocardiographic information, including the size and location of the ASD, the magnitude and hemodynamic impact of the left-to-right shunt, and the presence and degree of pulmonary arterial hypertension. In general, elective closure is advised for all ASDs with evidence of right ventricular overload or with a clinically significant shunt (pulmonary flow [Qp]–to–systemic flow [Qs] ratio >1.5). Lack of symptoms is not a contraindication for repair. In childhood, spontaneous closure of secundum ASD may occur. However, in adulthood, spontaneous closure is unlikely. Patients may be monitored relatively conservatively for a period before intervention is advised. Considerations and even contraindications to consider no intervention include small size of the defect and shunt, severe pulmonary arterial hypertension, diagnosis during pregnancy (intervention can be deferred until after), severe left or right ventricular dysfunction. Guidelines for the management of adults with congenital heart disease have been recently updated. [ For both children and adults, surgical mortality rates for uncomplicated secundum ASD are approximately 1-3%. Because of the lifetime risk associated with ASD, as outlined including paradoxical embolization, there should be ongoing evaluation and review of the indication and risks for closure, even for patients with small shunts. However, such closure remains controversial because patients with small defects generally have a good prognosis, and the risk of cardiopulmonary bypass may not be warranted. The widespread use of catheter closure of secundum ASD with lower mortality and without cardiopulmonary bypass has raised the question regarding the need to close even small defects.  Long-term prevention of death and complications is best achieved when the ASD is closed before age 25 years and when the systolic pressure in the main pulmonary artery is less than 40 mm Hg. Even in elderly patients with large shunts, surgical closure can be performed at low risk and with good results in reducing symptoms. Either method of closure, whether transcatheter or surgical, results in excellent hemodynamic outcomes with no significant differences with regard to survival, functional capacity, atrial arrhythmias, or embolic neurologic events. However, atrial arrhythmia and neurologic events remain long-term risks particularly for patients with pre-existing events. [ 
       Contraindications 
         Closure of an atrial septal defect (ASD) is not recommended in patients with a clinically insignificant shunt (Qp-Qs ratio 0.7 or below) and in those who have severe pulmonary arterial hypertension or irreversible pulmonary vascular occlusive disease who have a reversed shunt with at-rest arterial oxygen saturations of less than 90%. In addition to the high surgical mortality and morbidity risk, closure of a defect in the latter situation may worsen the prognosis. Whether the patient whose condition is diagnosed well in the sixth decade of life would benefit from surgical closure remains controversial. 
     Workup 
       Laboratory Studies 
         See the list below: 
           
             No specific laboratory blood tests are indicated in the workup of atrial septal defects (ASDs). 
             Routine laboratory studies should be performed in patients undergoing intervention for ASD:  
               
                 Complete blood count 
                 Type and screen 
                 Metabolic profile or chemistry 
                 Coagulation studies (prothrombin time [PT] and activated partial thromboplastin time [aPTT]) 
       Imaging Studies 
         See the list below: 
           
             Chest radiography  
               
                 In the presence of a clinically significant left-to-right shunt, chest radiographs most often show cardiomegaly because of dilatation of the right atrium and right ventricular chamber.  
                 The pulmonary artery is prominent, and pulmonary vascular markings are increased in the lung fields. 
                 Left atrial enlargement is rare only if clinically significant mitral regurgitation. On occasion, proximal dilatation of the superior vena cava can be seen in sinus venosus defect.  
             Transthoracic echocardiography [ 
               
                 An uncertain diagnosis can be clarified with transthoracic 2-dimensional echocardiography, which provides direct noninvasive visualization of most types of ASDs, including evaluation of the right atrium, right ventricle, and pulmonary arteries, as well as other associated abnormalities. The view most beneficial is often the subcostal view. One exception is the diagnosis of a sinus venosus defect, for which transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) may be needed to image the defect, but this still may not be able to visualize the pulmonary venous return. TEEs and an echocardiogram are shown below:  
                   Parasternal short axis: RV dilation with RV pressure overload as evidenced by flattening of the... Parasternal short axis: RV dilation with RV pressure overload as evidenced by flattening of the interventricular septum in systole.  
                   Transesophageal echocardiogram: Moderate-large ASD with left-to-right shunt across the... Transesophageal echocardiogram: Moderate-large ASD with left-to-right shunt across the interatrial septum.  
                   Apical 4-chamber view.  Apical 4-chamber view.  
                 In any patient with an ASD, particularly a sinus venosus defect, anomalies of systemic venous connection should be sought. These can be clearly identified by 2-dimensional imaging. Right atrial and right ventricular enlargement without identification of the cause should prompt consideration for a TEE.  
                 Doppler echocardiography may be helpful in demonstrating flow across the atrial septum. It typically shows a biphasic (systolic and diastolic) pattern with a small right-to-left shunt at the beginning of systole.  
                 Transthoracic echocardiography may be suboptimal in some patients with poor echocardiographic windows. In such patients, TEE can provide excellent definition of the atrial septum. TEE is also useful in guiding device placement during catheter ASD occlusion procedures and in providing immediate intraoperative assurance that defect closure is accomplished.  
                 Continuous-wave Doppler echocardiography is valuable for estimating right ventricular (and pulmonary arterial when there is no associated right ventricular outflow tract obstruction) systolic pressure when a tricuspid regurgitant jet is present. This technique is also useful in evaluating patients for obstruction to pulmonary venous return.  
                 Contrast echocardiography can provide additional confirmation. A right-to-left shunt can be detected by visualizing microcavitation bubbles in the left atrium and the left ventricle. A left-to-right shunt can be detected as a negative contrast washout effect in the right atrium.  
             MRI: MRI has successfully been used to identify the size and position of ASD. However, utility is limited for small defects. A major advantage of MRI is the ability to quantify right ventricular size, volume, and function along with the ability to identify the systemic and pulmonary venous return.  
       Other Tests 
         See the list below: 
           
             Electrocardiography  
               
                 Characteristic findings in patients with secundum ASD are a normal sinus rhythm, right-axis deviation, and an rSR' pattern in V 1, 
                 Left-axis deviation and an rSR' pattern in V 1, 
                 Left-axis deviation and negative P wave in lead III suggest sinus venosus defect. 
                 Increasing pulmonary hypertension can cause loss of the rSR' pattern in V 1 
                 A prolonged P-R interval can be seen in familial ASD or ostium primum secondary to left atrial enlargement and an increased distance for internodal conduction produced by the defect itself. Displacement of the AV node in a posteroinferior direction in some patients or an enlarged right atrium has also been reported.  
       Diagnostic Procedures 
         See the list below: 
           
             When noninvasive techniques demonstrate the presence of an uncomplicated ASD in a child, routine cardiac catheterization for diagnosis is unnecessary.  
             However, cardiac catheterization may be useful if the clinical data are inconsistent, if clinically significant pulmonary arterial hypertension is suspected, or if concurrent coronary artery disease must be assessed in patients older than 40 years. Catheterization is also a viable alternative for intervention for secundum ASD.  
             The diagnosis of ASD may be confirmed by directly passing the catheter through the defect.  
               
                 Serial oxygen saturation measurements can be used to estimate the magnitude of the shunt 
                 In young patients, right heart pressures are often normal despite a large shunt. 
                 If high oxygen saturation is present in the superior vena cava or if the catheter enters a pulmonary vein directly from the right atrium, sinus venosus type is likely.  
                 Partial anomalous pulmonary venous return is usually associated with sinus venosus defect, but it may also accompany the ostium secundum type.  
     Treatment & Management 
       Medical Therapy 
         Atrial septal defect (ASD) is a disorder to be addressed surgically or through interventional catheterization. No specific or definitive medical therapy is available. However, patients with significant volume overload or atrial arrhythmias may require specific drug therapy. 
       Surgical Therapy 
         Criterion standard The criterion standard in the treatment of atrial septal defect (ASD) is direct closure of the defect by using an open approach with extracorporeal support. John Gibbon performed the first successful ASD closure by applying this method in 1953. Surgical techniques and equipment have since improved to the point that the mortality rate from this repair approaches zero.  In the usual procedure, a median sternotomy incision is made, and the sternum is split in the midline. Direct arterial and double venous (superior vena cava and inferior vena cava) cannulation are performed. By applying cardiopulmonary bypass, the aorta is clamped, and the heart is arrested with a cardioplegia solution. The caval snares are tightened, and the right atrium is opened. Most secundum defects can be closed by using a direct continuous suture of 3-0 or 4-0 polypropylene (Prolene).  Caution must be taken when large defects are directly closed because this closure can distort the atrium. Large defects that rise superiorly can distort the aortic anulus if closed directly. These ASDs are best closed by using autologous pericardium or synthetic patches made of polyester polymer (Dacron) or polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE). Care must be taken to completely remove any air or debris from the left atrium and ventricle before cardiopulmonary bypass is discontinued. Temporary pacing wires are left in place on the right ventricle before the chest is closed over the drains.  In an ostium primum defect, surgical closure is more complicated. The patch must be attached to the septum at the juncture of the mitral and tricuspid valves. Mitral valve repair, including closure of the cleft mitral leaflet and, possibly annuloplasty, may be necessary to correct or prevent mitral insufficiency. In rare cases, mitral valve replacement may be required.  In a sinus venosus defect, partial anomalous pulmonary venous return is typical. One or more of the pulmonary veins primarily drains into the right atrium. The ASD must be patched in such a way as to ensure that the anomalous pulmonary venous drainage is diverted into the left atrium. This patching may be simple or complex, depending on where the anomalous drainage enters. Many innovative techniques have been developed to redirect pulmonary venous flow, and the surgeon should be familiar with several approaches. Pulmonary venous return must not be compromised with the redirection because this invariably causes localized pulmonary venous hypertension.  
         Minimally invasive approaches In recent years, minimally invasive approaches to the repair of ASD have garnered significant interest. In most cases, the size of the incision is simply decreased with different approaches to cardiopulmonary bypass. Examples include partial or full submammary skin incision, hemisternotomy, and limited thoracotomy. The goal is to improve better cosmetic results because these approaches are not associated with decreased morbidity or mortality.  
         Percutaneous transcatheter closure In recent times, secundum ASD have been closed by using a variety of catheter-implanted occlusion devices rather than by direct surgical closure with cardiopulmonary bypass. These devices are placed through a femoral venous approach and are deployed like an umbrella to seal the septal defect. These devices work best for centrally located secundum defects. Although surgical closure is associated with low morbidity and mortality and excellent long-term results, sternotomy and cardiopulmonary bypass are required. [ Drs King and Mills performed the first transcatheter closure of a secundum ASD in the mid-1970s. William Rashkind pioneered the development of percutaneous ASD closure technique in late 1970s. Jim Lock developed the clamshell method in 1989. Around the same time, Sideris started clinical trials with buttoned device.  Although many devices have been studied, over the last few years, 4 major devices have become available: CardioSEAL (NMT Medical, Inc; Boston, Mass), Amplatzer septal occluder (ASO) (AGA Medical Corporation; Golden Valley, Minn), HELEX septal occluder (Gore Medical [WL Gore & Associates, Inc]; Flagstaff, Ariz), and Sideris patch (Custom Medical Devices; Amarillo, Tex). The ASO is currently the most widely used device because it is easy to implant and allows closure of large orifices with excellent success rates in most cases. It was first used in humans in 1995. Selection of a particular device is difficult because no randomized trials have been conducted. Furthermore, devices are currently not amenable to percutaneous closure of ostium primum and sinus venosus defects.  With this method, the static diameter of the defect is first assessed by using TEE. The diameter is then measured with a sizing balloon using the “stop-flow” technique to select the proper diameter of the device. Using this technique, the sizing balloon is inflated until no flow is visible through the defect using TEE. The margins of the orifice must be wide enough (≤5 mm) to accommodate the edges of the closing device. TEE has been the mainstream technique for device sizing, positioning, and deployment, but it can cause discomfort. In addition, airway protection and general anesthesia are required. Intracardiac echocardiography has been used for the same purpose.  Transcatheter closure of ASDs is now established practice at most cardiac centers. It is proven safe in experienced hands, it is cost-effective, and it favorably compares to surgical closure with successful implantation rates of more than 96%. Transcatheter closure has been associated with fewer complications, shortened hospitalization, and reduced need for blood products.  At any age, ASD closure is followed by symptomatic improvement and regression of positive airway pressure (PAP) and right ventricle size; however, the best outcome is achieved in patients with less functional impairment and less elevated PAP. [ Furthermore, transcatheter closure appears to have additional benefits regarding hemodynamic improvement compared with surgery. In one study, transcatheter closure with ASO improved the left atrial volume index, the left ventricular myocardial performance index, and the right ventricular myocardial performance index. [ Another group compared atrial function in 45 patients with a mean age of 9 years after surgery and after percutaneous closure by using strain-rate imaging. [ 
       Postoperative Details 
         Postoperative management after atrial septal defect (ASD) repair is usually standard. Patients are expected to be awake and often extubated shortly after the operation. Drainage tubes are removed from the chest the first morning after surgery, and, except when rhythm problems occur, the pacing wires are removed shortly thereafter. Most patients can eat and ambulate without difficulty on the first or second postoperative day, and most are discharged by the third or fourth postoperative day. After transcatheter occlusion, patients are generally discharged the next day. Six months of treatment with aspirin with or without clopidogrel is recommended to prevent thrombus formation. 
       Follow-up 
         Surgical follow-up care is maintained until the patient's wounds are completely healed and normal activities are resumed. This period rarely exceeds 1-2 months. All complications must be clearly resolved before the patient is discharged from surgical care.  Obtain at least 1 follow-up echocardiogram to confirm complete closure of the ASD. A cardiologist with congenital experience should continue patient care to monitor for recurrence of the shunt and to ensure that the patient has returned to normal activities and cardiac function. For most patients, a yearly appointment after the immediate postoperative period is adequate, in large part to follow and evaluate for arrhythmia complications.  For patient education resources, see  Heart Center Palpitations 
       Complications 
         Surgery may be associated with a long-term risk of atrial fibrillation or flutter. The risk of  infective endocarditis 
           
             Congestive heart failure 
             Arrhythmias 
             
               Pulmonary hypertension 
             
               Cyanosis 
             Paradoxical embolization 
             Stroke 
             Infective endocarditis The following complications are specifically associated with the use of transcatheter occlusion devices: 
           
             Device embolization and malpositioning: The incidence significantly varies among devices and is related to operator experience and appropriate case selection. With experienced clinicians, the incidence is less than 1%. Device embolization and malpositioning happens as a result of inadequate sizing of the defect or incorrect device placement.  
             Postimplantation arrhythmias: The incidence is 1-4% and varies from first- to third-degree AV block and atrial fibrillation. These arrhythmias are usually short-lived and do not require medical treatment. Patients who develop complete heart block are typically hemodynamically stable and do not require pacing. The incidence of arrhythmia appears to be related to the size of the device.  
             Thrombus formation: A study of 1000 patients was performed to investigate the incidence of thrombus by performing TEE at 4 weeks and 6 months after the procedure. [ [ 
             Cardiac perforation: The incidence is 0.1-0.4% for various devices. Oversizing of the device and deficient anterosuperior rims are risk factors for perforation. Technique-related perforation during the procedure is amenable to intervention. Device-related perforations occur after technically adequate procedure in approximately 70% of patients after hospital discharge. A retrospective review of 24 patients revealed that all presented with chest pain, shortness of breath, hemodynamic collapse, or sudden death. About 76% were female patients, and 70% of the perforations were late. If pericardial effusion is present on predischarge echocardiography, the patient should be hospitalized for 24-48 hours of observation and follow-up echocardiography. [ 
             Device erosion: Erosion of septal occluder devices occurs in 0.1-0.15% of implants. [ 
             Increased levels of cardiac troponin I: Transcatheter closure induces minor myocardial lesions, the extent of which depends on the size of the ASO. The patient's age is not a factor. [ 
             Residual shunts: As many as 20% of patients may have a residual shunt persisting for 24 hours after the procedure; >90% of such residua are small. During follow-up, the incidence approaches 0% at 3 years for most series. [ 
             Other complications include pericardial effusion, transient ischemic attack, and sudden death. 
       Outcome and Prognosis 
         Natural history Although life expectancy is not normal for patients with atrial septal defect (ASD), patients generally survive into adulthood without surgical or percutaneous intervention, and many patients live to advanced age. However, natural survival beyond age 40-50 years is less than 50%, and the attrition rate after 40 years of age is about 6% per year. Advanced pulmonary hypertension seldom occurs before the third decade. Late complications are stroke and atrial fibrillation.  
         Postsurgical prognosis The mortality rate of surgical repair is less than 1% for patients younger than 45 years without heart failure and who have systolic pulmonary artery pressures less than 60 mm Hg. The morbidity rate is low. The surgical mortality rate increases with increasing age and pulmonary artery pressures.  Surgical repair should be considered for all patients with uncomplicated ASDs with a clinically significant left-to-right shunt. Such repair is ideally completed at 2-4 years of age. Early surgical repair is considered in a few infants and young children with clinically significant symptoms or congestive heart failure (CHF). Surgery before the age 25 years results in a 30-year survival rate comparable to that of age- and sex-matched control subjects. However, at age 25-40 years, surgical survival is reduced, though not significantly if pulmonary artery pressures are normal. If pulmonary artery systolic pressure is higher than 40 mm Hg, late survival is 50% less than control rates, though life expectancy in surgically treated older patients is better than that of medically treated patients. Even in select patients older than 60 years with no serious comorbidities, ASDs should be closed as early as possible if an indication is present because surgery improves symptoms–at least in the short term–regardless of pulmonary artery pressure or functional class, as long as the left-to-right shunt remains large. Although surgical closure of ASDs in adulthood is associated with a significant mortality benefit, its benefit is limited in preventing atrial arrhythmias. The patient's age at the time of closure is the most important predictor of the development of atrial arrhythmia.  Surgery for sinus venosus ASD is also associated with low morbidity and mortality, and postoperative subjective clinical improvement occurs irrespective of the patient's age at surgery. However, in contrast to ostium secundum ASD, surgery for sinus venosus defect is relatively complex and poses the risks of stenosis of the superior vena cava or pulmonary veins, residual shunting, and dysfunction of the sinoatrial node.  In childhood, right ventricular dimensions decrease, often strikingly, after surgery. However, when adults undergo surgery, the dimensions remain abnormal in approximately 80% of patients. If right ventricular failure and tricuspid regurgitation are present before surgery, late postoperative right atrial and ventricular enlargement is typical, and right ventricular systolic function seldom normalizes. Patients in this situation improve, but they usually remain symptomatic, and their preoperative pulmonary vascular resistance influences their long-term outcome.  A few patients who undergo surgical closure during childhood have late-onset supraventricular arrhythmias, which are believed to be related to patchy fibrosis of the right atrium secondary to dilatation and perhaps dysfunction of the sinus node. In adults, chronic preoperative atrial fibrillation usually persists after surgical repair, but cardioversion followed by antiarrhythmics treatment may be effective. If surgery is performed in patients older than 40 years, 50% of those with preoperative normal sinus rhythm have late postoperative atrial fibrillation. Intracardiac electrophysiologic studies have shown a high incidence of intrinsic dysfunction of the sinoatrial and AV nodes that persists after surgical repair. These nodal abnormalities are most common in the sinus venosus type than in the secundum type.  Late events, including atrial fibrillation, stroke, and heart failure, are most common in patients undergoing repair in adulthood. This observation emphasizes the benefit of early repair of secundum ASDs in symptomatic patients. The unfavorable prognosis of late repairs is presumably related to long-standing deleterious effect of volume overload on the chambers on the right side, of pulmonary hypertension, and of right atrial enlargement with increased vulnerability to atrial arrhythmias and stroke. About 22% of late deaths are attributed to cerebrovascular events. Older age at repair and preoperative New York Heart Association class III or IV heart failure are independent predictors of late mortality. They are also predictive of atrial fibrillation, for which sinus node dysfunction with bradycardia-dependent atrial arrhythmias, scar-dependent multiple reentries, and atrial enlargement or atrial fibrosis due to increased pulmonary venous pressure with exercise are implicated as potential mechanisms. In a cohort of 300 minimally symptomatic patients at intervention with either surgical or transcatheter closure, long-term follow-up (median 10 years) shows maintained functional class, but continued arrhythmia risk associated with age at procedure and pre-existing arrhythmia. When controlling for these variables, there was a trend toward more arrhythmia in the surgical cohort. However, embolic events were more common in the transcatheter cohort. [ 
         Prognosis after transcatheter closure See Treatment above. 
         Common comorbidities Common comorbidities include the following: 
           
             Pulmonary hypertension  
               
                 Pulmonary hypertension (mean pulmonary artery pressure >20 mm Hg or systolic pulmonary artery pressure >50 mm Hg) occurs in 15-20% of patients with ASD.  
                 This condition is unusual in young patients, but it is observed in 50% of patients older than 40 years. 
                 In Eisenmenger syndrome—a late and rare complication of isolated secundum ASD that occurs in 5-15% of patients—extreme pulmonary obstruction may result in a reversal of the shunt of blood to a right-to-left flow. Desaturated blood entering the systemic circulation results in systemic hypoxemia and cyanosis.  
             Right-sided heart failure  
               
                 Heart failure is due to the cardiac volume overload experienced on the right side of the heart because of left-to-right shunting. 
                 In patients of all ages, substantial relief of such a complication is generally observed after the defect is closed. 
             Atrial fibrillation atrial flutter 
               
                 These conditions are uncommon in young patients, though they are reported in as many as 50-60% of patients older than 40 years. Therefore, these arrhythmias occur most frequently with age, and they may become a major cause of morbidity and mortality.  
                 The use of anticoagulants is indicated in patients with atrial fibrillation because of the high risk of stroke. Although atrial fibrillation may be present in patients before surgery, surgery may also cause it.  
             Stroke  
               
                 Regardless of their surgical status, 5-10% of patients have thromboembolic events (including stroke and  transient ischemic attacks 
                 Even with small defects, paradoxical emboli may occur. Therefore, the presence of an ASD should be considered in any patient with a cerebral or other systemic embolus in whom no left-sided source is demonstrable.  
       Future and Controversies 
         With increased experience over the years, transcatheter closure of suitable secundum atrial septal defects (ASDs) has now become preferable to surgical repair. Limitations currently include size and location of the defect.  Perhaps the most innovative approach to surgical closure in many years was recently accomplished in the form of robotically assisted closure of ASD. Current technology allows for excellent visualization and magnification of internal anatomy, and the ability to perform surgery at a remote distance from the patient is now a reality. However, even with this amazing technology, today's devices will seem crude compared with future computer robots. Improved access and cardiopulmonary bypass technology will most likely make robotically assisted heart surgery a routine procedure in the near future.  
     start media 
       
         Parasternal short axis: RV dilation with RV pressure overload as evidenced by flattening of the... Parasternal short axis: RV dilation with RV pressure overload as evidenced by flattening of the interventricular septum in systole.  
       
         Transesophageal echocardiogram: Moderate-large ASD with left-to-right shunt across the... Transesophageal echocardiogram: Moderate-large ASD with left-to-right shunt across the interatrial septum.  
       
         Apical 4-chamber view.  Apical 4-chamber view.  
     
       Author 
         David H Adler, MD, FACC Assistant Professor of Medicine, Eastern Virginia Medical School; Cardiologist, Cardiovascular Associates, Ltd David H Adler, MD, FACC is a member of the following medical societies:  American College of Cardiology American Heart Association Disclosure: Received honoraria from Abiomed for speaking and teaching. 
       Coauthor(s) 
         Alexander R Ellis, MD, MSc, FAAP, FACC Assistant Professor of Internal Medicine and Pediatrics, Eastern Virginia Medical School; Co-Director, Pediatric Echocardiography Laboratory, Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Director, Adult Congenital Heart Disease Program, Children’s Hospital of the King’s Daughters; Director of Resident and Medical Student Education, Division of Cardiology, Children’s Hospital of the King’s Daughters and Eastern Virginia Medical School Alexander R Ellis, MD, MSc, FAAP, FACC is a member of the following medical societies:  American Academy of Pediatrics American College of Cardiology Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Pharmacy Editor 
         Francisco Talavera, PharmD, PhD Adjunct Assistant Professor, University of Nebraska Medical Center College of Pharmacy; Editor-in-Chief, Medscape Drug Reference Disclosure: Received salary from Medscape for employment. for: Medscape. 
       Managing Editor 
         Steven J Compton, MD, FACC, FACP, FHRS Director of Cardiac Electrophysiology, Alaska Heart Institute, Providence and Alaska Regional Hospitals Steven J Compton, MD, FACC, FACP, FHRS is a member of the following medical societies:  American College of Physicians American Heart Association American Medical Association Heart Rhythm Society Alaska State Medical Association American College of Cardiology Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Chief Editor 
         Park W Willis IV, MD Sarah Graham Distinguished Professor of Medicine and Pediatrics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of Medicine Park W Willis IV, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American Society of Echocardiography Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Additional Contributors 
         Park W Willis IV, MD Sarah Graham Distinguished Professor of Medicine and Pediatrics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of Medicine Park W Willis IV, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American Society of Echocardiography Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
     Acknowledgements 
       Marc G Cribbs, MD Marc G Cribbs, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American Heart Association American Medical Association Christian Medical & Dental Society Disclosure: Nothing to disclose.  Larry W Markham, MD Larry W Markham, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American Academy of Pediatrics Disclosure: Nothing to disclose.  Bekir Hasan Melek, MD Bekir Hasan Melek is a member of the following medical societies:  American Association for the Advancement of Science American College of Cardiology American College of Physicians American Heart Association American Medical Association American Society of Echocardiography Louisiana State Medical Society Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. Jeffrey C Milliken, MD Jeffrey C Milliken, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  Alpha Omega Alpha American Association for Thoracic Surgery American College of Cardiology American College of Chest Physicians American College of Surgeons American Heart Association American Society for Artificial Internal Organs California Medical Association International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation Phi Beta Kappa Society of Thoracic Surgeons Southwest Oncology Group Western Surgical Association Disclosure: Nothing to disclose.  Peter B Smulowitz Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. James V Talano, MD, MBA, MM, FACC, FAHA James V Talano, MD, MBA, MM, FACC, FAHA is a member of the following medical societies:  American College of Cardiology American College of Chest Physicians American College of Physician Executives American College of Physicians American Heart Association American Society of Echocardiography American Society of Nuclear Cardiology Heart Failure Society of America Society of Geriatric Cardiology Disclosure: Nothing to disclose.  
     
       Constantinescu T,  Magda SL,  Niculescu R,  Mincu RI,  Zaharia D,  Toma CL, et al. New Echocardiographic Tehniques in Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension vs. Right Heart Catheterization - A Pilot Study.  Maedica (Buchar) [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Li QY, Newbury-Ecob RA, Terrett JA, Wilson DI, Curtis AR, Yi CH. Holt-Oram syndrome is caused by mutations in TBX5, a member of the Brachyury (T) gene family.  Nat Genet [Medline] 
       Ruiz-Perez VL, Ide SE, Strom TM, Lorenz B, Wilson D, Woods K. Mutations in a new gene in Ellis-van Creveld syndrome and Weyers acrodental dysostosis.  Nat Genet [Medline] 
       Benson DW, Silberbach GM, Kavanaugh-McHugh A, Cottrill C, Zhang Y, Riggs S. Mutations in the cardiac transcription factor NKX2.5 affect diverse cardiac developmental pathways.  J Clin Invest [Medline] [Full Text] 
       [Guideline] Warnes CA,  Williams RG,  Bashore TM,  Child JS,  Connolly HM,  Dearani JA, et al. ACC/AHA 2008 Guidelines for the Management of Adults with Congenital Heart Disease: Executive Summary: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines (writing committee to develop guidelines for the management of adults with congenital heart disease).  Circulation [Medline] 
       Kutty S,  Hazeem AA,  Brown K,  Danford CJ,  Worley SE,  Delaney JW, et al. Long-term (5- to 20-year) outcomes after transcatheter or surgical treatment of hemodynamically significant isolated secundum atrial septal defect.  Am J Cardiol [Medline] 
       Kaya Y,  Yurtdas M,  Ceylan Y,  Bulut MO,  Söylemez N,  Güvenç TS, et al. [Percutaneous closure of secundum atrial septal defects in pediatric and adult patients: short- and mid-term follow-up results].  Turk Kardiyol Dern Ars [Medline] 
       Humenberger M, Rosenhek R, Gabriel H, et al. Benefit of atrial septal defect closure in adults: impact of age.  Eur Heart J [Medline] 
       Salehian O, Horlick E, Schwerzmann M, Haberer K, McLaughlin P, Siu SC. Improvements in cardiac form and function after transcatheter closure of secundum atrial septal defects.  J Am Coll Cardiol [Medline] 
       Di Salvo G,  Drago M,  Pacileo G,  Rea A,  Carrozza M,  Santoro G, et al. Atrial function after surgical and percutaneous closure of atrial septal defect: a strain rate imaging study.  J Am Soc Echocardiogr [Medline] 
       Krumsdorf U, Ostermayer S, Billinger K, Trepels T, Zadan E, Horvath K. Incidence and clinical course of thrombus formation on atrial septal defect and patient foramen ovale closure devices in 1,000 consecutive patients.  J Am Coll Cardiol [Medline] 
       Brandt RR, Neumann T, Neuzner J, Rau M, Faude I, Hamm CW. Transcatheter closure of atrial septal defect and patent foramen ovale in adult patients using the Amplatzer occlusion device: no evidence for thrombus deposition with antiplatelet agents.  J Am Soc Echocardiogr [Medline] 
       Divekar A, Gaamangwe T, Shaikh N, Raabe M, Ducas J. Cardiac perforation after device closure of atrial septal defects with the Amplatzer septal occluder.  J Am Coll Cardiol [Medline] 
       Amin Z, Hijazi ZM, Bass JL, Cheatham JP, Hellenbrand WE, Kleinman CS. Erosion of Amplatzer septal occluder device after closure of secundum atrial septal defects: review of registry of complications and recommendations to minimize future risk.  Catheter Cardiovasc Interv [Medline] 
       Tarnok A, Bocsi J, Osmancik P, Hausler HJ, Schneider P, Dahnert I. Cardiac troponin I release after transcatheter atrial septal defect closure depends on occluder size but not on patient's age.  Heart [Medline] 
       Egred M, Andron M, Albouaini K, Alahmar A, Grainger R, Morrison WL. Percutaneous closure of patent foramen ovale and atrial septal defect: procedure outcome and medium-term follow-up.  J Interv Cardiol [Medline] 
       Fischer G, Stieh J, Uebing A, Hoffmann U, Morf G, Kramer HH. Experience with transcatheter closure of secundum atrial septal defects using the Amplatzer septal occluder: a single centre study in 236 consecutive patients.  Heart [Medline] 
       Anzai H, Child J, Natterson B, Krivokapich J, Fishbein MC, Chan VK. Incidence of thrombus formation on the CardioSEAL and the Amplatzer interatrial closure devices.  Am J Cardiol [Medline] 
       Argenziano M, Oz MC, DeRose Jr JJ, et al. Totally endoscopic atrial septal defect repair with robotic assistance.  The Heart Surgery Forum [Full Text] 
       Bartel T, Konorza T, Arjumand J, et al. Intracardiac echocardiography is superior to conventional monitoring for guiding device closure of interatrial communications.  Circulation [Medline] 
       Bartel T, Konorza T, Neudorf U, Ebralize T, Eggebrecht H, Gutersohn A. Intracardiac echocardiography: an ideal guiding tool for device closure of interatrial communications.  Eur J Echocardiogr [Medline] 
       Bedford DE. The anatomical types of atrial septal defect. Their incidence and clinical diagnosis.  Am J Cardiol [Medline] 
       Benson DW, Sharkey A, Fatkin D, Lang P, Basson CT, McDonough B. Reduced penetrance, variable expressivity, and genetic heterogeneity of familial atrial septal defects.  Circulation [Medline] 
       Besterman E. Atrial septal defect with pulmonary hypertension.  Br Heart J [Medline] 
       Bialkowski J, Karwot B, Szkutnik M, Banaszak P, Kusa J, Skalski J. Closure of atrial septal defects in children: surgery versus Amplatzer device implantation.  Tex Heart Inst J [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Braunwald E. Atrial septal defect. Braunwald E, ed.  Heart Disease: A Text of Cardiovascular Medicine 
       Carlsson E. Anatomic diagnosis of atrial septal defects.  Am J Roentgenol Radium Ther Nucl Med [Medline] 
       Cherian G, Uthaman CB, Durairaj M, et al. Pulmonary hypertension in isolated secundum atrial septal defect: high  frequency in young patients.  Am Heart J [Medline] 
       Chessa M, Carminati M, Butera G, et al. Early and late complications associated with transcatheter occlusion of secundum atrial septal defect.  J Am Coll Cardiol [Medline] 
       Goldman L, Braunwald E.  Primary Cardiology 
       Holmvang G, Palacios IF, Vlahakes GJ, et al. Imaging and sizing of atrial septal defects by magnetic resonance.  Circulation [Medline] 
       Humenberger M,  Rosenhek R,  Gabriel H,  Rader F,  Heger M,  Klaar U, et al. Benefit of atrial septal defect closure in adults: impact of age.  Eur Heart J [Medline] 
       Isselbacher KJ, Braunwald E, Wilson JD. Atrial septal defect. Isselbacher KJ, ed.  Harrison's Principles of Internal Medicine 
       Jost CH, Connolly HM, Danielson GK, et al. Sinus venosus atrial septal defect: long-term postoperative outcome for 115patients.  Circulation 
       Kirklin JW, Barratt-Boyes BG.  Cardiac Surgery 
       Konstantinides S, Geibel A, Olschewski M, et al. A comparison of surgical and medical therapy for atrial septal defect  in adults.  N Engl J Med [Medline] 
       Kronzon I, Tunick PA, Freedberg RS, et al. Transesophageal echocardiography is superior to transthoracic  echocardiography in the diagnosis of sinus venosus atrial septal defect.  J Am Coll Cardiol [Medline] 
       Latson LA. Per-catheter ASD closure.  Pediatr Cardiol [Medline] 
       Marelli AJ, Moodie DS, Topol EJ. Adult congenital heart disease.  Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine 
       Masura J, Gavora P, Podnar T. Long-term outcome of transcatheter secundum-type atrial septal defect closure using Amplatzer septal occluders.  J Am Coll Cardiol 
       Moore KL, Persaud TVN.  Before We Are Born: Essentials of Embryology and Birth Defects 
       Murphy JG, Gersh BJ, Mair DD, et al. Long-term outcome in patients undergoing surgical repair of tetralogy  of Fallot.  N Engl J Med [Medline] 
       O''Laughlin MP. Catheter closure of secundum atrial septal defects.  Tex Heart Inst J [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Piéchaud JF. Closing down: transcatheter closure of intracardiac defects and vessel embolisations.  Heart [Medline] 
       Rao PS. Catheter closure of atrial septal defects.  J Invasive Cardiol [Medline] 
       Ruge H, Wildhirt SM, Libera P, Vogt M, Holper K, Lange R. Images in cardiovascular medicine. Left atrial thrombus on atrial septal defect closure device as a source of cerebral emboli 3 years after implantation.  Circulation [Medline] 
       Sealy WC, Farmer JC, Young Jr WG, et al. Atrial dysrhythmia and atrial secundum defects.  J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg [Medline] 
       Seward JB, Khandheria BK, Edwards WD, et al. Biplanar transesophageal echocardiography: anatomic correlations, image orientation, and clinical applications.  Mayo Clin Proc [Medline] 
       Staniloae CS, El-Khally Z, Ibrahim R, et al. Percutaneous closure of secundum atrial septal defect in adults   a single center experience with the amplatzer septal occluder.  J Invasive Cardiol [Medline] 
       Stark J. Secundum atrial septal defect.  Surgery for Congenital Heart Defects 
       Tardif JC, Schwartz SL, Vannan MA, et al. Clinical usefulness of multiplane transesophageal echocardiography:  comparison to biplanar imaging.  Am Heart J [Medline] 
       Thuny F,  Di Salvo G,  Belliard O,  Avierinos JF,  Pergola V,  Rosenberg V, et al. Risk of embolism and death in infective endocarditis: prognostic value of echocardiography: a prospective multicenter study.  Circulation [Medline] 
       Tonni G, Ferrari B, Defelice C, Centini G. Neonatal porencephaly in very low birth weight infants: ultrasound timing of asphyxial injury and neurodevelopmental outcome at two years of age.  J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med [Medline] 
       Vick GW 3rd, Murphy DJ Jr, Ludomirsky A, et al. Pulmonary venous and systemic ventricular inflow obstruction in  patients with congenital heart disease: detection by combined two-dimensional and Doppler echocardiography.  J Am Coll Cardiol [Medline] 
       Warnes CA. The adult with congenital heart disease: born to be bad?.  J Am Coll Cardiol [Medline] 
       Webb G, Gatzoulis MA. Atrial septal defects in the adult: recent progress and overview.  Circulation [Medline] 
       Weyman AE, Wann LS, Caldwell RL, et al. Negative contrast echocardiography: a new method for detecting left-to-  right shunts.  Circulation [Medline] 
       Zanchetta M, Onorato E, Rigatelli G, Pedon L, Zennaro M, Carrozza A. Intracardiac echocardiography-guided transcatheter closure of secundum atrial septal defect: a new efficient device selection method.  J Am Coll Cardiol [Medline]

Article 3:

   
     Complications of Myocardial Infarction 
       Complications of Myocardial Infarction: Overview, Arrhythmic Complications of MI, Arrhythmic Complications: Supraventricular Tachyarrhythmias 
       Complications of Myocardial Infarction: Overview, Arrhythmic Complications of MI, Arrhythmic Complications: Supraventricular Tachyarrhythmias 
       Overview Overview Arrhythmic Complications of MI Arrhythmic Complications: Supraventricular Tachyarrhythmias Arrhythmic Complications: Accelerated Junctional Rhythm Arrhythmic Complications: Bradyarrhythmias Arrhythmic Complications: AV and Intraventricular Blocks Arrhythmic Complications: Ventricular Arrhythmias Arrhythmic Complications: Reperfusion Arrhythmias Mechanical Complications of MI Left Ventricular Aneurysm Miscellaneous Complications 
       Complications of Myocardial Infarction Overview 164924-overview Dec 18, 2014 2015-08-04-18:21 1 Cardiology 2002 Diseases & Conditions Condition 
       1 2 content 164924 502 315 2 r96 
     Jun 04, 2015 
       condition Diseases & Conditions 
       cardiology Cardiology 
       cardiology_cad Coronary Artery Disease myocardial infarction, MI, arrhythmic complications of MI, mechanical complications of MI, post-MI complications, postinfarct complications, acute myocardial infarction, AMI, acute myocardial infarction radiology, myocardial infarction emergency, heart attack, ST-elevation myocardial infarction, STEMI, non–ST-elevation myocardial infarction, NSTEMI, cardiogenic shock, cardiogenic shock emergency, cardiac arrhythmias, dysrhythmia, peri-infarction arrhythmia, reperfusion arrhythmia, ventricular fibrillation, ventricular fibrillation emergency, ventricular arrhythmia, supraventricular tachyarrhythmia, supraventricular tachycardia, ventricular tachycardia, junctional rhythm, accelerated junctional rhythm, bradyarrhythmias, sinus bradycardia, junctional bradycardia, atrioventricular block, AV block,coronary artery disease, CAD, coronary artery atherosclerosis, atherosclerosis, myocardial ischemia, sudden cardiac death, congestive heart failure, CHF, congestive heart failure and pulmonary edema, left ventricular mural thrombus, early pericarditis, acute pericarditis, post-MI syndrome, Dressler syndrome, Dressler's syndrome, right ventricular infarction,myocardial rupture, rupture of the ventricular free wall, ventricular free wall rupture, ventricular septal rupture, papillary muscle rupture, mitral regurgitation, left ventricular aneurysm, ventricular aneurysms Myocardial infarction (MI) due to coronary artery disease is a leading cause of death in the United States, where more than 1 million people have acute myocardial infarctions (AMIs) each year. 
 The advent of coronary care units and early reperfusion therapy (lytic or percutaneous coronary intervention) has substantially decreased in-hospital... 0 Complications of Myocardial Infarction 
     Overview 
       Myocardial infarction (MI) due to coronary artery disease is a leading cause of death in the United States, where more than 1 million people have acute myocardial infarctions (AMIs) each year. [ The advent of coronary care units and early reperfusion therapy (lytic or percutaneous coronary intervention) has substantially decreased in-hospital mortality rates and has improved the outcome in survivors of the acute phase of MI.  Complications of MI include arrhythmic, mechanical, and inflammatory (early pericarditis and post-MI syndrome) sequelae, as well as left ventricular mural thrombus (LVMT). In addition to these broad categories, right ventricular (RV) infarction and cardiogenic shock are other possible complications of acute MI. (See the image below.) 
         Modified 2-dimensional (top) echocardiogram and color flow Doppler image (bottom). Apical 4-... Modified 2-dimensional (top) echocardiogram and color flow Doppler image (bottom). Apical 4-chamber views show a breach in the interventricular septum and free communication between ventricles through a large apical septum ventricular septal defect in a patient who recently had an anterior myocardial infarction.  For other discussions on myocardial infarction, see  Myocardial Infarction Right Ventricular Infarction Imaging of Acute Myocardial Infarcts Use of Cardiac Markers in the Emergency Department 
     Arrhythmic Complications of MI 
       About 90% of patients who have an acute myocardial infarction (AMI) develop some form of cardiac arrhythmia during or immediately after the event. In 25% of patients, such rhythm abnormalities manifest within the first 24 hours. In this group of patients, the risk of serious arrhythmias, such as ventricular fibrillation, is greatest in the first hour and declines thereafter. The incidence of arrhythmia is higher with an ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) and lower with a non–ST-elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI). [ The clinician must be aware of these arrhythmias, in addition to reperfusion strategies, and must treat those that require intervention to avoid exacerbation of ischemia and subsequent hemodynamic compromise. Most peri-infarct arrhythmias are benign and self-limited. However, those that result in hypotension, increase myocardial oxygen requirements, and/or predispose the patient to develop additional malignant ventricular arrhythmias should be aggressively monitored and treated.  
       Pathophysiology of arrhythmic complications AMI is characterized by generalized autonomic dysfunction that results in enhanced automaticity of the myocardium and conduction system. Electrolyte imbalances (eg, hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia) and hypoxia further contribute to the development of cardiac arrhythmia. The damaged myocardium acts as substrate for re-entrant circuits, due to changes in tissue refractoriness.  Enhanced efferent sympathetic activity, increased concentrations of circulating catecholamines, and local release of catecholamines from nerve endings in the heart muscle itself have been proposed to play roles in the development of peri-infarction arrhythmias. Furthermore, transmural infarction can interrupt afferent and efferent limbs of the sympathetic nervous system that innervates myocardium distal to the area of infarction. The net result of this autonomic imbalance is the promotion of arrhythmias.  
       Classification of peri-infarction arrhythmias Peri-infarction arrhythmias can be broadly classified into the following categories: 
         
           Supraventricular tachyarrhythmias, including sinus tachycardia, premature atrial contractions,  paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia atrial flutter atrial fibrillation 
           
             Accelerated junctional rhythms 
           Bradyarrhythmias, including  sinus bradycardia junctional bradycardia 
           Atrioventricular (AV) blocks first-degree AV block second-degree AV block third-degree AV block 
           Intraventricular blocks, including left anterior fascicular block,  right bundle branch block left bundle branch block 
           Ventricular arrhythmias, including  premature ventricular contractions accelerated idioventricular rhythm ventricular tachycardia ventricular fibrillation 
           Reperfusion arrhythmias 
     Arrhythmic Complications: Supraventricular Tachyarrhythmias 
       Sinus tachycardia is associated with enhanced sympathetic activity and can result in transient  hypertension Causes of persistent sinus tachycardia include the following: 
         
           Pain  
           
             Anxiety 
           
             Heart failure 
           
             Hypovolemia 
           Hypoxia 
           
             Anemia 
           
             Pericarditis 
           
             Pulmonary embolism In the setting of an AMI, sinus tachycardia must be identified, and appropriate treatment strategies must be devised. Treatment strategies include adequate pain medication, diuresis to manage heart failure, oxygenation, volume repletion for hypovolemia, administration of anti-inflammatory agents to treat pericarditis, and use of beta-blockers and/or nitroglycerin to relieve ischemia.  
       Premature atrial contractions Premature atrial contractions often occur before the development of paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia, atrial flutter, or atrial fibrillation. The usual cause of these extra impulses is atrial distention due to increased left ventricular (LV) diastolic pressure or inflammation associated with pericarditis.  No specific therapy is indicated. However, attention should be given to identifying the underlying disease process, particularly occult heart failure.  
       Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia The incidence of a paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia in the setting of an AMI is less than 10%. In the absence of definitive data in the patient with AMI, the consensus is that  adenosine synchronized electrical cardioversion 
       Atrial flutter Atrial flutter occurs in less than 5% of patients with AMI. Atrial flutter is usually transient and results from sympathetic overstimulation of the atria.  Treatment strategies for persistent atrial flutter are similar to those for atrial fibrillation, except that ventricular-rate control with drugs is less easily accomplished with atrial flutter than with atrial fibrillation. Therefore, synchronized electrical cardioversion (beginning with 50 J, or the biphasic equivalent) may be needed relatively promptly because of a decrease coronary blood flow and/or hemodynamic compromise. For patients whose atrial flutter is refractory to medical therapy, overdrive atrial pacing may be considered.  
       Atrial fibrillation The rate of atrial fibrillation is 10-15% among patients who have AMIs. The onset of atrial fibrillation in the first hours of AMI is usually caused by LV failure, ischemic injury to the atria, or RV infarction. Pericarditis and all conditions leading to elevated left atrial pressure can also lead to atrial fibrillation in association with an AMI. The presence of atrial fibrillation during an AMI is associated with an increased risk of mortality and stroke, particularly in patients who have anterior-wall MIs.  Immediate electrical cardioversion is indicated for the patient in unstable condition, such as one with new or worsening ischemic pain and/or hypotension. Synchronized electrical cardioversion to treat atrial fibrillation begins with 200 J (or the biphasic equivalent). Conscious sedation (preferred) or  general anesthesia For patients in stable condition, controlling the ventricular response is the immediate objective. If the atrial fibrillation does not respond to cardioversion, IV  amiodarone [ digoxin For patients who do not develop hypotension, a beta-blocker can be used. For example,  metoprolol diltiazem Atrial fibrillation and atrial flutter confer an increased risk of thromboembolism (see  Deep Venous Thrombosis Pulmonary Embolism 
     Arrhythmic Complications: Accelerated Junctional Rhythm 
       An accelerated junctional rhythm results from increased automaticity of the junctional tissue that leads to a heart rate of 70-130 bpm. This type of dysrhythmia is most common in patients who develop inferior myocardial infarctions. Treatment is directed at correcting the underlying ischemia.  
     Arrhythmic Complications: Bradyarrhythmias 
       Sinus bradycardia Sinus bradycardia is a common arrhythmia in patients with inferior or posterior acute myocardial infarctions (AMIs). The highest incidence, 40%, is observed in the first 1-2 hours after AMI.  The likely mechanism leading to bradycardia and hypotension is stimulation of cardiac vagal afferent receptors that result in efferent cholinergic stimulation of the heart. In the early phases of an AMI, resultant sinus bradycardia may actually be protective, reducing myocardial oxygen demand. Clinically significant bradycardia that decreases cardiac output and hypotension may result in ventricular arrhythmias and should, therefore, be treated aggressively. Isolated sinus bradycardia is not associated with an increase in the acute mortality risk, and therapy is typically unnecessary when the patient has no adverse signs or symptoms.  When emergency therapy is indicated (eg, in a patient with a sinus rate of < 40 bpm with hypotension), atropine sulfate 0.5-1 mg may be given every 3-5 minutes to a maximum of 0.03-0.04 mg/kg. The inability to reverse hypotension with atropine in patients who develop sinus bradycardia and inferior MI suggests volume depletion and/or RV infarction.  When atropine is ineffective and the patient is symptomatic or hypotensive, transcutaneous or transvenous pacing is indicated (see our main article on  External Pacemakers If these interventions fail, additional pharmacologic intervention may be useful. Examples are  dopamine epinephrine dobutamine 
       Junctional bradycardia Junctional bradycardia is a protective AV junctional escape rhythm at a rate of 35-60 bpm in patients who have an inferior MI. This arrhythmia is not usually associated with hemodynamic compromise, and treatment is typically not required.  
     Arrhythmic Complications: AV and Intraventricular Blocks 
       First-degree AV block First-degree AV block is characterized by prolongation of the PR interval to longer than 0.20 seconds. This type of block occurs in approximately 15% of patients who have an acute myocardial infarction (AMI), most commonly an inferior infarction. Almost all patients who develop first-degree AV block have conduction disturbances above the His bundle. In these patients, the progression to complete heart block or ventricular asystole is rare. No specific therapy is indicated unless associated hemodynamic compromise is present.  Calcium channel blockers and beta-blockers may cause or exacerbate a first-degree AV block, but they should be stopped only if hemodynamic impairment or a higher-degree block occurs. For a first-degree AV block associated with sinus bradycardia and hypotension, atropine should be administered. Continued cardiac monitoring is advisable in view of possible progression to higher degrees of block.  
       Second-degree AV block Mobitz type I, or Wenckebach, AV block occurs in approximately 10% of patients who have an AMI and accounts for 90% of all patients who have an AMI and a second-degree AV block. A second-degree AV block is associated with a narrow QRS complex and is most commonly associated with an inferior MI. It does not affect the patient's overall prognosis.  A Mobitz type I block does not necessarily require treatment. If the heart rate is inadequate for perfusion, immediate treatment with atropine 0.5-1 mg administered intravenously is indicated. Transcutaneous or temporary transvenous pacing is rarely required.  A Mobitz type II AV block accounts for 10% of all second-degree AV blocks (overall rate of < 1% in the setting of AMI). A Mobitz type II block is characterized by a wide QRS complex, and it is almost always associated with anterior infarction. This type of block often progresses suddenly to a complete heart block.  Mobitz type II AV blocks are associated with a poor prognosis, as the mortality rate associated with their progression to a complete heart block is approximately 80%. Therefore, this type of second-degree AV block should be immediately treated with transcutaneous pacing or atropine. Atropine helps in about 50% of cases, but it occasionally worsens the block with an increased heart rate. A temporary transvenous pacemaker, and possibly a permanent demand pacemaker, must ultimately be placed.  
       Third-degree AV block A third-degree AV block (ie, a complete heart block), occurs in 5-15% of patients who have an AMI and may occur with anterior or inferior infarctions. In patients with inferior infarctions, this type of block usually develops gradually, progressing from first-degree or a type I second-degree block. In most patients, the level of the block is supranodal or intranodal, and the escape rhythm is usually stable with a narrow QRS and rates exceeding 40 bpm. In 30% of patients, the block is below the His bundle, where it results in an escape rhythm with a rate slower than 40 bpm and a wide QRS complex.  Complete heart block in patients with an inferior MI usually responds to atropine. In most patients, it resolves within a few days without the need for a temporary or permanent pacemaker. The mortality rate for patients with inferior MI who develop complete heart block is approximately 15% unless a coexisting RV infarction is present, in which case the mortality rate is higher.  Immediate treatment with atropine is indicated for patients with third-degree AV blocks. As with therapy for a Mobitz type II block, this treatment may not help and may sometimes worsen the block. Temporary transcutaneous or transvenous pacing is indicated for symptomatic patients whose condition is unresponsive to atropine. Permanent pacing should be considered in patients with persistent symptomatic bradycardia that remains unresolved with lysis or percutaneous coronary intervention.  In patients with an anterior MI, an intraventricular block or a Mobitz type II AV block usually precedes a third-degree AV block. The third-degree block occurs suddenly and is associated with a high mortality rate. The Cardiac Arrhythmias and Risk Stratification After Myocardial Infarction (CARISMA) trial monitored patients with acute myocardial infarction and reduced left ventricular ejection fraction and found that high-degree atrioventricular block was the most powerful predictor of cardiac death. [ Immediate treatment with atropine and/or transcutaneous pacing is indicated. This is followed by temporary transvenous pacing. Patients with an anterior MI who develop a third-degree AV block and who survive to hospitalization often receive a permanent pacemaker.  
       Intraventricular blocks Conduction from the His bundle is transmitted through 3 fascicles: the anterior division of the left bundle, the posterior division of the left bundle, and the right bundle. An abnormality of electrical conduction in 1 or more of these fascicles is noted in about 15% of patients with AMI. Isolated left anterior fascicular block (LAFB) occurs in 3-5% of patients with AMI; progression to complete AV block is uncommon. Isolated left posterior fascicular block occurs in only 1-2% of patients who have an AMI. The blood supply of the posterior fascicle is larger than that of the anterior fascicle; therefore, a block here is associated with a relatively large infarct and high mortality rate. The right bundle branch receives its dominant blood supply from the left anterior descending (LAD) artery. Therefore, a new RBBB, which is seen in approximately 2% of patients with AMI, suggests a large infarct territory. However, progression to complete heart block is uncommon. In patients who develop an anterior MI and a new RBBB, the substantial risk for death is mostly from cardiogenic shock, which is presumably due to the large size of the myocardial infarct.  The combination of RBBB with an LAFB is known as bifascicular block and commonly occurs with occlusion of the proximal LAD coronary artery. The risk of developing complete AV block is heightened, but complete block is still uncommon. Mortality is mostly related to the amount of muscle loss. Bifascicular block in the presence of first-degree AV block is called a trifascicular block. In 40% of patients, a trifascicular block progresses to a complete heart block.  
     Arrhythmic Complications: Ventricular Arrhythmias 
       Premature ventricular contractions In the past, frequent premature ventricular contractions (PVCs) were considered to represent warning arrhythmias and indicators of impending malignant ventricular arrhythmias. However, presumed warning arrhythmias are frequently observed in patients who have an acute myocardial infarction (AMI) and who never develop ventricular fibrillation. On the converse, primary ventricular fibrillation often occurs without antecedent premature ventricular ectopy.  For these reasons, prophylactic suppression of PVCs with antiarrhythmic drugs, such as lidocaine, is no longer recommended. Prophylaxis has been associated with an increased risk of fatal bradycardia or asystole because of the suppression of escape  pacemakers Given this evidence, most clinicians pursue a conservative course when PVCs are observed in a patient with an AMI, and they do not routinely administer prophylactic antiarrhythmics. Instead, attention should be directed toward correcting any electrolytic or metabolic abnormalities, plus identifying and treating recurrent ischemia.  
       Accelerated idioventricular rhythm An accelerated idioventricular rhythm is seen in as many as 20% of patients who have an AMI. This pattern is defined as a ventricular rhythm characterized by a wide QRS complex with a regular escape rate faster than the atrial rate, but less than 100 bpm. AV dissociation is frequent. Slow, nonconducted P waves are seen; these are unrelated to the fast, wide QRS rhythm.  Most episodes are short and terminate spontaneously. They occur with equal frequency in anterior and inferior infarctions. The mechanism might involve (1) the sinoatrial node or the AV node, which may sustain structural damage and depress nodal automaticity, and/or (2) an abnormal ectopic focus in the ventricle that takes over as the dominant pacemaker.  The presence of accelerated idioventricular rhythm does not affect the patient's prognosis; no definitive evidence has shown that an untreated occurrence increases the incidence of ventricular fibrillation or death. This rhythm occurs somewhat more frequently in patients who develop early reperfusion than in others; however, it is neither sensitive nor specific as a marker of reperfusion.  Temporary pacing is not indicated unless the rhythm is sustained and results in hypotension or ischemic symptoms. An accelerated idioventricular rhythm represents an appropriate escape rhythm. Suppression of this escape rhythm with an antiarrhythmic drug can result in clinically significant bradycardia or asystole. Therefore, an accelerated idioventricular rhythm should be left untreated.  
       Nonsustained ventricular tachycardia Nonsustained ventricular tachycardia is defined as 3 or more consecutive ventricular ectopic beats at a rate of greater than 100 bpm and lasting less than 30 seconds. In patients who experience multiple runs of nonsustained ventricular tachycardia, the risk for sudden hemodynamic collapse may be substantial.  Nonetheless, nonsustained ventricular tachycardia in the immediate peri-infarction period does not appear to be associated with an increased mortality risk, and no evidence suggests that antiarrhythmic treatment offers a morbidity or mortality benefit. However, nonsustained ventricular tachycardia occurring more than 48 hours after infarction in patients with LV systolic dysfunction (LV ejection fraction < 0.40) poses an increased risk for sudden cardiac death; electrophysiologic testing and appropriate therapy are indicated in these patients.  Multiple episodes of nonsustained ventricular tachycardia require intensified monitoring and attention to electrolyte imbalances. Serum potassium levels should be maintained above 4.5 mEq/L, and serum magnesium levels should be kept above 2.0 mEq/L. Ongoing ischemia should aggressively be sought and corrected if found.  
       Sustained ventricular tachycardia Sustained ventricular tachycardia is defined as 3 or more consecutive ventricular ectopic beats at a rate greater than 100 bpm and lasting longer than 30 seconds or causing hemodynamic compromise that requires intervention. Monomorphic ventricular tachycardia is most likely to be caused by a myocardial scar, whereas polymorphic ventricular tachycardia may be most responsive to measures directed against ischemia. Sustained polymorphic ventricular tachycardia after an AMI is associated with a hospital mortality rate of 20%.  Emergency treatment of sustained ventricular tachycardia is mandatory because of its hemodynamic effects and because it frequently deteriorates into ventricular fibrillation. Rapid polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (rate >150 bpm) associated with hemodynamic instability should be treated with immediate direct-current unsynchronized cardioversion of 200 J (or biphasic energy equivalent). Monomorphic ventricular tachycardia should be treated with a synchronized discharge of 100 J (or biphasic energy equivalent).  If sustained ventricular tachycardia is well tolerated, antiarrhythmic therapy with amiodarone (drug of choice) or procainamide may be attempted before electrical cardioversion. Precipitating causes, such as electrolyte abnormalities, acid-base disturbances, hypoxia, or medication, should be sought and corrected. For persistent or recurrent ventricular tachycardia, overdrive pacing may be effective in electrically converting the patient's rhythm to a sinus rhythm.  
       Ventricular fibrillation The incidence of primary ventricular fibrillation is greatest in the first hour after the onset of infarct (4.5%) and declines rapidly thereafter. Approximately 60% of episodes occur within 4 hours, and 80% occur within 12 hours.  Secondary or late ventricular fibrillation occurring more than 48 hours after an MI is usually associated with pump failure and cardiogenic shock. Factors associated with an increased risk of secondary ventricular fibrillation are a large infarct, an intraventricular conduction delay, and an anteroseptal AMI. Secondary ventricular fibrillation in conjunction with cardiogenic shock is associated with an in-hospital mortality rate of 40-60%.  Treatment for ventricular fibrillation is unsynchronized electrical countershock with at least 200-300 J (or biphasic energy equivalent) administered as rapidly as possible. Each minute after the onset of uncorrected ventricular fibrillation is associated a 10% decrease in the likelihood of survival. Restoration of synchronous cardiac electrical activity without the return of effective contraction (ie, electromechanical dissociation, or  pulseless electrical activity Antiarrhythmics, such as intravenous amiodarone and lidocaine, facilitate successful electrical defibrillation and help prevent recurrent or refractory episodes. After ventricular fibrillation is successfully converted, antiarrhythmic therapy is generally continued as a constant intravenous infusion for 12-24 hours.  Prophylactic lidocaine reduces the incidence of ventricular fibrillation, but it is not used because it seems to be associated with an excessive mortality risk owing to bradycardic and asystolic events. [ [ 
     Arrhythmic Complications: Reperfusion Arrhythmias 
       In the past, the sudden onset of rhythm disturbances after thrombolytic therapy in patients with AMI was believed to be a marker of successful coronary reperfusion. However, a high incidence of identical rhythm disturbances is observed in patients with AMI in whom coronary reperfusion is unsuccessful. Therefore, these so-called reperfusion arrhythmias are neither sensitive nor specific for reperfusion and should be treated as discussed under Accelerated Idioventricular Rhythm in the Arrhythmic Complications: Ventricular Arrhythmias section above.  
     Mechanical Complications of MI 
       The 3 major mechanical complications of AMI are ventricular free wall rupture (VFWR),  ventricular septal rupture mitral regurgitation Myocardial Rupture 
       Overview of ventricular free wall rupture VFWR is the most serious complication of AMI. VFWR is usually associated with large transmural infarctions and antecedent infarct expansion. It is the most common cause of death, second only to LV failure, and it accounts for 15-30% of the deaths associated with AMI. Incontrovertibly the most catastrophic of mechanical complications, VFWR leads to acute hemopericardium and death from  cardiac tamponade The overall incidence of VFWR ranges from 0.8-6.2%. The incidence of this complication has declined over the years with better 24 hour systolic blood pressure control; increased use of reperfusion therapy, beta blockers, and ACE inhibitors; and decreased use of heparin [ Data from the National Registry of Myocardial Infarction (NRMI) showed an elevated incidence of in-hospital mortality among patients who received thrombolytic therapy (12.1%) than among patients who did not (6.1%). [ [ Risk factors for VFWR include advanced age greater than 70 years, female sex, no previous MIs, Q waves on ECG, hypertension during the initial phase of STEMI, corticosteroid or NSAID use, and fibrinolytic therapy more than 14 hours after STEMI onset. Patients with a history of  angina pectoris [ 
       Clinical presentation of VFWR VFWRs are dramatic; they present acutely or occasionally subacutely as pseudoaneurysms; and they most often involve the anterior or lateral wall of the LV. Most VFWRs occur within the first week after AMI.  Becker et al classified the following 3 types of VFWRs [ 
         
           Type I - an abrupt slitlike tear that is frequently associated with anterior infarcts and that occurs early (within 24 h) 
           Type II - an erosion of infarcted myocardium at the border between the infarcted and viable myocardium 
           Type III - an early aneurysm formation correlated with older and severely expanded infarcts Type III usually occurs later than type I or type II ruptures. Thrombolytic therapy accelerates the occurrence of cardiac rupture in Becker type I and type II VFWRs. In severely expanded infarctions (type III), thrombolytic therapy decreases the incidence of cardiac rupture.  A pseudoaneurysm is formed when adjacent pericardium and hematoma seals off a myocardial rupture or perforation. The wall of a pseudoaneurysm is most often visualized as an aneurysmal outpouching that communicates with the LV cavity by means of a narrow neck. This wall is composed of pericardium and organized thrombus and/or hematoma. It is devoid of myocardial elements, whereas a true aneurysm has all the elements of the original myocardial wall and a relatively wide base. The pseudoaneurysm may vary in size and is at high risk of rupturing.  Clinical presentations of VFWR vary depending on the acuity, location, and size of the rupture. Patients with acute VFWR present with severe chest pain, abrupt electromechanical dissociation or asystole, hemodynamic collapse, and possibly death. In about one third of the patients, the course is subacute, and they present with symptoms such as syncope, hypotension, shock, arrhythmia, and prolonged and recurrent chest pain.  
       Diagnosis of VFWR Early diagnosis of VFWRs and intervention are critical to patient survival. A high index of suspicion is required when patients with AMI present with severe chest pain, shock or arrhythmias, and abrupt development of electromechanical dissociation. ECG signs of impending VFWR have limited specificity but include sinus tachycardia, intraventricular conduction defect, and persistent or recurrent ST-segment elevation.  Echocardiography is the diagnostic tool of choice. The key diagnostic finding is a moderate-to-large pericardial effusion with clinical and echocardiographic signs of impending pericardial tamponade. In patients with cardiac tamponade and electromechanical dissociation, moderate-to-severe pericardial effusion increases the mortality risk. Those patients without initial cardiac tamponade, while at a lower rate of mortality, should still be followed, as late rupture may still occur. [ MRI provides superior image quality and permits identification of the site and anatomy of a ventricular pseudoaneurysm (ie, ruptured LV restrained by the pericardium with enclosed clot). However, MRI is of limited use in the acute setting because of the time involved and nonportability of imaging units.  
       Treatment of VFWR The most important prevention strategy is early reperfusion therapy, with percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) being the preferred modality. Fibrinolytic therapy is associated with overall decreased risk of VFWR; however, its use more than 14 hours after STEMI onset can increase the risk of early rupture. [ The standard treatment for VFWR is emergency surgical repair after hemodynamic stability is achieved. Patients may first need intravenous fluids, inotropic agents, and emergency pericardiocentesis.  Pifarré and associates recommended the deployment of an intra-aortic balloon pump to decrease systolic afterload and improve diastolic myocardial perfusion. [ Several surgical techniques have been applied, including infarctectomy, adhering with biologic glue patches made of polyethylene terephthalate polyester fiber (Dacron; DuPont, Wilmington, DE) or polytetrafluoroethylene fluoropolymer resin (Teflon; DuPont); and use of pledgeted sutures without infarctectomy.  The mortality rate is significantly high and largely depends on the patient's preoperative hemodynamic status. Early diagnosis, rapid institution of the measures described above to achieve hemodynamic stability, and prompt surgical repair can improve survival rates. A follow-up to the Acorn randomized trial demonstrated long-term improvement in left ventricular structure and function after mitral valve surgery for as long as 5 years. These data provide evidence supporting mitral valve repair in combination with the Acorn CorCap device for patients with nonischemic heart failure with severe left ventricular dysfunction who have been medically optimized yet remain symptomatic with significant mitral regurgitation. [ 
       Overview of ventricular septal rupture VSR is an infrequent but life-threatening complication of AMI. Despite optimal medical and surgical treatment, patients with VSR have a high in-hospital mortality rate. During the prethrombolytic era, VSRs occurred in 1-3% of individuals with MIs. The incidence declined with thrombolytic therapy (to 0.2-0.34%) because of improvements in reperfusion and myocardial salvage. The bimodal distribution of VSR is characterized by a high incidence in the first 24 hours, with another peak on days 3-5 and rarely more than 2 weeks after AMI.  In patients receiving thrombolytics, the median time from the onset of symptoms of AMI to septal rupture was 1 day in the Global Utilization of Streptokinase and TPA [tissue plasminogen activator] for Occluded Coronary Arteries (GUSTO-I) trial [ [ Risk factors for septal rupture include advanced age (>65 y), female sex, single-vessel disease, extensive MI, and poor septal collateral circulation. [ In patients with AMI without reperfusion, coagulation necrosis develops within 3-5 days after infarction. Neutrophils migrate to the necrotic zone and undergo apoptosis, release lytic enzymes, and hasten the disintegration of necrotic myocardium. Some patients have infarcts with large intramural hematomas, which dissect into the tissue and result in early septal rupture. The size of the septal rupture ranges from a few millimeters to several centimeters.  VSR is categorized as simple or complex depending on its length, course, and location. In simple septal rupture, the perforation is at the same level on both sides of the septum, and a direct through-and-through communication is present across the septum. A complex septal rupture is characterized by extensive hemorrhage with irregular, serpiginous tracts in the necrotic tissue.  Septal ruptures are most common in patients with large anterior MIs due to occlusion of the LAD artery causing extensive septal infarcts. These infarcts are associated with ST-segment elevations and Q waves in inferior leads (II, III, aVF) and these ECG changes are therefore more commonly seen in septal ruptures. [ Septal ruptures in patients with inferior MI occur relatively infrequently. These ruptures involve the basal inferoposterior septum and are often complex.  
       Clinical presentation of VSR Symptoms of VSR complicating AMI include chest pain, shortness of breath, hypotension, biventricular failure, and shock within hours to days. Patients often present with a new, loud, and harsh holosystolic murmur. This murmur is loudest along the lower left sternal border and is associated with a palpable parasternal systolic thrill. RV and LV S3 gallops are common.  In patients with cardiogenic shock complicating septal rupture, the murmur and thrill may be difficult to identify. In contrast, patients with acute MR often have a soft systolic murmur at the apex without a thrill.  
       Diagnosis of VSR Echocardiography with color flow Doppler imaging is the diagnostic tool of choice for identifying a VSR. (See the image below.) Its sensitivity and specificity have been reported to be as high as 100%. In addition, it can be used for the following:  
         
           Define the site and size of septal rupture 
           Assess the LV and RV function 
           Estimate the RV systolic pressure 
           Quantify the left-to-right shunt Cardiac catheterization is usually required to confirm the diagnosis, quantitate the degree of left-to-right shunt, differentiate VSR from other conditions (eg, mitral regurgitation), plus visualize the coronary arteries. 
         Modified 2-dimensional (top) echocardiogram and color flow Doppler image (bottom). Apical 4-... Modified 2-dimensional (top) echocardiogram and color flow Doppler image (bottom). Apical 4-chamber views show a breach in the interventricular septum and free communication between ventricles through a large apical septum ventricular septal defect in a patient who recently had an anterior myocardial infarction.  In patients with VSR, right-heart catheterization shows a step-up in oxygen saturation from the right atrium to the RV; in contrast, no step-up in oxygen saturation occurs among patients with MR. The presence of large V waves in the pulmonary capillary wedge tracing supports the diagnosis of severe acute MR.  Left ventriculography can also be used to identify the site of ventricular rupture (see  Cardiac Catheterization [Left Heart] 
       Treatment of VSR The key to management of VSR is prompt diagnosis and an aggressive approach to hemodynamic stabilization, angiography, and surgery. The optimal approach includes hemodynamic stabilization with the administration of oxygen and mechanical support with use of an intra-aortic balloon pump, as well as the administration of vasodilators (to reduce afterload and thus LV pressure and the left-to-right shunt), diuretics, and inotropic agents.  Cardiac catheterization is needed to define the coronary anatomy; this is followed by urgent surgical repair. Medical therapy is intended only for temporary stabilization before surgery, as most patients' conditions deteriorate rapidly and they die in the absence of surgical intervention. In the GUSTO-I trial, the 30-day mortality rate was lower in patients with VSR who underwent surgical repair than in patients treated medically (47% vs 94%), as was the 1-year mortality rate (53% vs 97%). [ [ Current guidelines of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association for the treatment of patients with septal rupture complicating AMI highlight urgent surgical intervention, regardless of their clinical status. [ 
         
           Prompt establishment of hypothermic cardiopulmonary bypass 
           An approach to the septal rupture through the infarct area and the excision of all necrotic, friable margins of the septum and ventricular walls to avoid postoperative hemorrhage, residual septal defect, or both  
           Reconstruction of the septum and ventricular walls by using prosthetic material and preservation of the geometric configuration of the ventricles and heart function  Percutaneous closure of septal rupture is a relatively new approach, one used in select patients as an alternative to surgical repair or for the acute stabilization of critically ill patients. However, percutaneous closure is currently unavailable in many institutions, and no long-term outcome data are available.  Several studies failed to show a relationship between perioperative mortality and concomitant coronary revascularization (coronary artery bypass grafting). Patients with cardiogenic shock due to septal rupture have the poorest outcome. In the SHOCK trial, the in-hospital mortality rate was higher in patients with cardiogenic shock due to septal rupture (87.3%) than in patients with cardiogenic shock from all other causes (59.2% with pure LV failure and 55.1% with acute MR). [ In patients who survive surgical repair, the rate of recurrent or residual septal defect is reported to be about 28%, and the associated mortality rate is high.  Repeat surgical intervention is indicated in patients who have clinical heart failure or a pulmonary-systemic fraction greater than 2.  
       Overview of acute mitral regurgitation MR is a common complication of AMI that results from local and global LV remodeling and that is an independent predictor of heart failure and death. MR typically occurs 7-10 days after an AMI, though this onset may vary according to the mechanism of MR. Papillary muscle rupture resulting in MR occurs within 1-14 days (median, 1 d).  Mild-to-moderate MR is often clinically silent and detected on Doppler echocardiography performed during the early phase of AMI. In such cases, MR rarely causes hemodynamic compromise. Speckle tracking and 3-dimensional echocardiography proved to be important imaging tools in assessing reverse LV remodeling after degenerative mitral valve regurgitation surgery. Subtle regional preoperative changes in diastolic function of the septal and lateral wall could be preoperatively identified, aiding in optimizing the referral timing and recognizing potential culprits as indicators of disease recurrence after mitral repair. [ Severe acute MR that results from the rupture of papillary muscles or chordae tendineae results in abrupt hemodynamic deterioration with cardiogenic shock. Rapid diagnosis, hemodynamic stabilization, and prompt surgical intervention are needed because acute severe MR is associated with a high mortality rate.  The reported incidence of MR may vary because of several factors, including the diagnostic methods used, the presence or absence of heart failure, the degree of MR reported, the type of therapy rendered, and the time from infarct onset to testing.  During the GUSTO-I trial, the incidence of MR in patients receiving thrombolytic therapy was 1.73%. [ [ [ Risk factors for MR are advanced age, female sex, large infarct, previous AMI, recurrent ischemia, multivessel coronary artery disease, and heart failure.  Several mechanisms can cause MR after AMI. Rupture of the papillary muscle is the most commonly reported mechanism. Such rupture occurs in 1% of patients with AMI and frequently involves the posteromedial papillary muscle rather than the anterolateral papillary muscle, as the former has a single blood supply versus the dual supply for the latter. Papillary muscle rupture may lead to flailing or prolapse of the leaflets, resulting in severe MR. Papillary muscle dysfunction due to scarring or recurrent ischemia may also lead to MR in the subacute and chronic phases after MI; this condition can resolve spontaneously.  Large posterior infarctions produce acute MR due to asymmetric annular dilation and altered function and geometry of the papillary muscle.  
       Clinical presentation of MR Patients with functional mild or moderate MR are often asymptomatic. The severity of symptoms varies depending on ventricular function. Clinical features of acute severe MR include shortness of breath, fatigue, a new apical holosystolic murmur, flash pulmonary edema, and shock.  The new systolic murmur may be only early-to-mid systolic, not holosystolic. It may be soft or even absent because of the abrupt rise in left atrial pressure, which lessens the pressure gradient between the left atrium and the LV, as compared with chronic MR. The murmur is best heard at the apex rather than the lower left sternal border, and it is uncommonly associated with a thrill. S3 and S4 gallops are expected.  
       Diagnosis of MR The clinician cannot rely on a new holosystolic murmur to diagnose MR or assess its severity because of the variable hemodynamic status. In a patient with AMI who presents with a new apical systolic murmur, acute pulmonary edema, and cardiogenic shock, a high index of clinical suspicion for severe MR is the key to diagnosis.  Chest radiography may show evidence of pulmonary edema in the acute setting without clinically significant cardiac enlargement. Echocardiography with color flow Doppler imaging is the standard diagnostic tool for detecting MR. Transthoracic echocardiography is the preferred initial screening tool, but transesophageal echocardiography is invaluable in defining the severity and exact mechanism of acute MR, especially when suspicion for papillary muscle rupture is high. Cardiac catheterization should be performed in all patients to determine the extent and severity of coronary artery disease.  
       Treatment of MR Determination of hemodynamic stability, elucidation of the exact mechanism of acute MR, and expedient therapy are all necessary for a favorable outcome. Medical management includes afterload reduction with the use of diuretics, sodium nitroprusside, and nitrates in patients who are not hypotensive.  In patients who have hemodynamic compromise, intra-aortic balloon counterpulsation should be deployed rapidly. This intervention usually substantially reduces afterload and regurgitant volume, improving cardiac output in preparation for surgical repair. Without surgical repair, medical therapy alone in patients with papillary muscle rupture results in inadequate hemodynamic improvement and a poor short-term prognosis.  Emergency surgical intervention is the treatment of choice for papillary muscle rupture. Surgical approaches may include mitral valve repair or replacement. In the absence of papillary muscle necrosis, mitral valve repair improves the survival rate more than mitral valve replacement does. This difference is because the subvalvular apparatus is usually preserved. Mitral valve repair also eliminates complications related to malfunction of the prosthesis.  In patients with extensive necrosis of papillary muscle and/or ventricular free wall, mitral valve replacement is the preferred modality. Coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) performed at the time of surgery was shown in one study to improve short- and long-term survival. [ The only situation in which emergency surgery can safely be avoided is in the case of intermittent MR due to recurrent ischemia. In these patients, successful myocardial revascularization may be effective. This procedure is accomplished by means of either angioplasty or coronary artery bypass grafting.  
     Left Ventricular Aneurysm 
       Overview of LVA Left ventricular aneurysm (LVA) is defined as a localized area of myocardium with abnormal outward bulging and deformation during both systole and diastole. The rate of LVAs after AMI is approximately 3-15%. Risk factors for LVA after AMI include female sex, total occlusion of the LAD artery, single-vessel disease, and absence of previous angina.  More than 80% of LVAs affect the anterolateral wall; these are usually associated with total occlusion of the LAD. The posterior and inferior walls are less commonly affected. LVAs generally range from 1-8 cm. Histologically, LVAs are composed of fibrous scar that is notably thinned. This scar is clearly delineated from the adjacent ventricular muscle on microscopic examination.  A history of MI and third or fourth heart sounds are common findings from the patient's history and physical examination. 
       Diagnosis of LVA The chest radiograph may reveal an enlarged cardiac silhouette. Electrocardiography is characterized by ST elevation that persists several weeks after AMI and that appears in the same leads as those showing the acute infarct. Echocardiography is 93% sensitive and 94% specific for detection of LVA (see the image below), but cardiac catheterization remains the standard for establishing the diagnosis. 
         Parasternal long-axis view of the left ventricle demonstrates a large inferobasal aneurysm. Note... Parasternal long-axis view of the left ventricle demonstrates a large inferobasal aneurysm. Note the wide neck and base of the aneurysm.  
       Treatment of LVA Patients with small or clinically insignificant aneurysms can be treated conservatively with close follow-up. Medical therapy generally consists of the use of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, which reduce afterload, infarct extension, and LV remodeling. Anticoagulation is required when patients have severe LV dysfunction and/or thrombus in the LV or aneurysm.  Surgical resection of the LVA is indicated if severe heart failure, ventricular tachyarrhythmias refractory to medical treatment, or recurrent thromboembolism is present.  
     Miscellaneous Complications 
       Left ventricular mural thrombus LVMT is a well-known complication of AMI and frequently develops after anterior infarcts of the LV wall. The incidence of LVMT as a complication of AMI ranges from 20-40% and may reach 60% in patients with large anterior-wall AMIs who are not treated with anticoagulant therapy. LVMT is associated with a high risk of systemic embolization. Anticoagulant therapy may substantially decrease the rate of embolic events by 33% compared with no anticoagulation.  Factors contributing to LVMT formation include LV regional-wall akinesia or dyskinesia with blood stasis, injury to and inflammation of the endocardial tissue that provides a thrombogenic surface, and a hypercoagulable state. The most common clinical presentation of patients with LVMT complicating an MI is stroke. Most episodes occur within the first 10 days after AMI. Physical findings depend on the site of embolism.  Transthoracic echocardiography remains the imaging modality of choice and is 92% sensitive and 88% specific for detecting LVMT (see the image below). Management of LVMT includes  heparin warfarin 
         Apical 2-chamber view depicts a large left ventricular apical thrombus with mobile extensions.  Apical 2-chamber view depicts a large left ventricular apical thrombus with mobile extensions.  
       Pericarditis The incidence of early pericarditis after MI is approximately 10%, and this complication usually develops within 24-96. Pericarditis is caused by inflammation of pericardial tissue overlying infarcted myocardium. The clinical presentation may include severe chest pain, usually pleuritic, and pericardial friction rub.  The key ECG change is diffuse ST-segment elevation in all or nearly all of leads. Echocardiography may reveal a small pericardial effusion. The mainstay of therapy usually includes aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Colchicine may be beneficial in patients with recurrent pericarditis.  
       Post-MI syndrome (Dressler syndrome) Before the era of reperfusion, the incidence of post-MI syndrome ranged from 1-5% after AMI, but this rate has dramatically declined with the advent of thrombolysis and coronary angioplasty.  Although the exact mechanism has yet to be elucidated, post-MI syndrome is considered to be an autoimmune process. Clinical features include fever, chest pain, and other signs and symptoms of pericarditis occurring 2-3 weeks after AMI. Management involves hospitalization and observation for any evidence of cardiac tamponade. Treatment comprises rest, use of NSAIDs, and/or steroids in patients with recurrent post-MI syndrome with disabling symptoms. 
       "Off-hour" MI admissions Despite the perception that patients with an acute MI admitted during off hours have higher rates of death compared to those admitted during regular hours, a multivariate analyses of outcomes data at the Mayo Clinic for weekends, nights, and holidays admissions of patients with acute MI who underwent percutaneous coronary interventions found no significant association for inpatient mortality, 30-day mortality, or 30-day readmissions, nor were there any differences in findings between those with or without ST-elevation MI (STEMI, non-STEMI). [ 
     start media 
       
         Modified 2-dimensional (top) echocardiogram and color flow Doppler image (bottom). Apical 4-... Modified 2-dimensional (top) echocardiogram and color flow Doppler image (bottom). Apical 4-chamber views show a breach in the interventricular septum and free communication between ventricles through a large apical septum ventricular septal defect in a patient who recently had an anterior myocardial infarction.  
       
         Apical 2-chamber view depicts a large left ventricular apical thrombus with mobile extensions.  Apical 2-chamber view depicts a large left ventricular apical thrombus with mobile extensions.  
       
         Parasternal long-axis view of the left ventricle demonstrates a large inferobasal aneurysm. Note... Parasternal long-axis view of the left ventricle demonstrates a large inferobasal aneurysm. Note the wide neck and base of the aneurysm.  
     
       Author 
         Ashok K Kondur, MD Clinical Assistant Professor, Department of Internal Medicine, Detroit Medical Center, Wayne State University Ashok K Kondur, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American College of Physicians Michigan State Medical Society Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Coauthor(s) 
         Luis C Afonso, MD Assistant Professor, Department of Internal Medicine-Cardiology, Program Director of Cardiology Fellowship Program, Wayne State University; Director of Echocardiography Laboratory, Harper University Hospital Luis C Afonso, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American College of Cardiology American College of Physicians American Medical Association American Society of Echocardiography Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
         Pawan Hari, MD, MPH Resident Physician, Department of Internal Medicine, Wayne State University School of Medicine Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Pharmacy Editor 
         Francisco Talavera, PharmD, PhD Adjunct Assistant Professor, University of Nebraska Medical Center College of Pharmacy; Editor-in-Chief, Medscape Drug Reference Disclosure: Received salary from Medscape for employment. for: Medscape. 
       Managing Editor 
         Brian Olshansky, MD Professor Emeritus of Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Iowa College of Medicine Brian Olshansky, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American College of Cardiology Heart Rhythm Society Cardiac Electrophysiology Society American Heart Association Disclosure: Received honoraria from Guidant/Boston Scientific for speaking and teaching; Received honoraria from Medtronic for speaking and teaching; Received consulting fee from Guidant/Boston Scientific for consulting; Received consulting fee from BioControl for consulting; Received consulting fee from Boehringer Ingelheim for consulting; Received consulting fee from Amarin for review panel membership; Received consulting fee from sanofi aventis for review panel membership. 
       Chief Editor 
         Eric H Yang, MD Associate Professor of Medicine, Director of Cardiac Catherization Laboratory and Interventional Cardiology, Mayo Clinic Arizona Eric H Yang, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  Alpha Omega Alpha Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
     Acknowledgements 
       The authors and editors of Medscape Reference gratefully acknowledge the contributions of previous authors Sumanth R Daram, MD, and Sridevi R Pitta, MD, to the development and writing of the source article. 
     
       Rosamond W, Flegal K, Friday G, et al. Heart disease and stroke statistics--2007 update: a report from the American Heart Association Statistics Committee and Stroke Statistics Subcommittee [erratum appears in Circulation. 2007 Feb 6;115(5):e172].  Circulation [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Dayan V, Soca G, Parma G, Mila R. Does early coronary artery bypass surgery improve survival in non-ST acute myocardial infarction?.  Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg [Medline] 
       Kontoyannis DA, Anastasiou-Nana MI, Kontoyannis SA, Zaga AK, Nanas JN. Intravenous amiodarone decreases the duration of atrial fibrillation associated with acute myocardial infarction.  Cardiovasc Drugs Ther [Medline] 
       Bloch Thomsen PE,  Jons C,  Raatikainen MJ,  Moerch Joergensen R,  Hartikainen J,  Virtanen V, et al. Long-term recording of cardiac arrhythmias with an implantable cardiac monitor in patients with reduced ejection fraction after acute myocardial infarction: the Cardiac Arrhythmias and Risk Stratification After Acute Myocardial Infarction (CARISMA) study.  Circulation [Medline] 
       MacMahon S, Collins R, Peto R, Koster RW, Yusuf S. Effects of prophylactic lidocaine in suspected acute myocardial infarction. An overview of results from the randomized, controlled trials.  JAMA [Medline] 
       Hjalmarson A,  Herlitz J,  Holmberg S,  Rydén L,  Swedberg K,  Vedin A, et al. The Göteborg metoprolol trial. Effects on mortality and morbidity in acute myocardial infarction.  Circulation [Medline] 
       Figueras J, Alcalde O, Barrabés JA, Serra V, Alguersuari J, Cortadellas J. Changes in hospital mortality rates in 425 patients with acute ST-elevation myocardial infarction and cardiac rupture over a 30-year period.  Circulation [Medline] 
       Becker RC, Gore JM, Lambrew C, Weaver WD, Rubison RM, French WJ. A composite view of cardiac rupture in the United States National Registry of Myocardial Infarction.  J Am Coll Cardiol [Medline] 
       Kleiman NS, Terrin M, Mueller H, Chaitman B, Roberts R, Knatterud GL. Mechanisms of early death despite thrombolytic therapy: experience from the Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction Phase II (TIMI II) study.  J Am Coll Cardiol [Medline] 
       Honan MB, Harrell FE Jr, Reimer KA, Califf RM, Mark DB, Pryor DB. Cardiac rupture, mortality and the timing of thrombolytic therapy: a meta-analysis.  J Am Coll Cardiol [Medline] 
       Becker RC,  Hochman JS,  Cannon CP,  Spencer FA,  Ball SP,  Rizzo MJ, et al. Fatal cardiac rupture among patients treated with thrombolytic agents and adjunctive thrombin antagonists: observations from the Thrombolysis and Thrombin Inhibition in Myocardial Infarction 9 Study.  J Am Coll Cardiol [Medline] 
       Becker AE, van Mantgem JP. Cardiac tamponade. A study of 50 hearts.  Eur J Cardiol [Medline] 
       Figueras J,  Barrabés JA,  Serra V,  Cortadellas J,  Lidón RM,  Carrizo A, et al. Hospital outcome of moderate to severe pericardial effusion complicating ST-elevation acute myocardial infarction.  Circulation [Medline] 
       Nakamura F, Minamino T, Higashino Y, Ito H, Fujii K, Fujita T. Cardiac free wall rupture in acute myocardial infarction: ameliorative effect of coronary reperfusion.  Clin Cardiol [Medline] 
       Pollak H, Nobis H, Mlczoch J. Frequency of left ventricular free wall rupture complicating acute myocardial infarction since the advent of thrombolysis.  Am J Cardiol [Medline] 
       Pifarré R, Sullivan HJ, Grieco J, Montoya A, Bakhos M, Scanlon PJ. Management of left ventricular rupture complicating myocardial infarction.  J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg [Medline] 
       Acker MA, Jessup M, Bolling SF, et al. Mitral valve repair in heart failure: Five-year follow-up from the mitral valve replacement stratum of the Acorn randomized trial.  J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg [Medline] 
       Crenshaw BS, Granger CB, Birnbaum Y, Pieper KS, Morris DC, Kleiman NS. Risk factors, angiographic patterns, and outcomes in patients with ventricular septal defect complicating acute myocardial infarction. GUSTO-I (Global Utilization of Streptokinase and TPA for Occluded Coronary Arteries) Trial Investigators.  Circulation [Medline] 
       Menon V, Webb JG, Hillis LD, et al. Outcome and profile of ventricular septal rupture with cardiogenic shock after myocardial infarction: a report from the SHOCK Trial Registry. SHould we emergently revascularize Occluded Coronaries in cardiogenic shocK?.  J Am Coll Cardiol [Medline] 
       Birnbaum Y,  Wagner GS,  Gates KB,  Thompson TD,  Barbash GI,  Siegel RJ, et al. Clinical and electrocardiographic variables associated with increased risk of ventricular septal defect in acute anterior myocardial infarction.  Am J Cardiol [Medline] 
       Skehan JD, Carey C, Norrell MS, de Belder M, Balcon R, Mills PG. Patterns of coronary artery disease in post-infarction ventricular septal rupture.  Br Heart J [Medline] 
       Hayashi T, Hirano Y, Takai H, Kimura A, Taniguchi M, Kurooka A. Usefulness of ST-segment elevation in the inferior leads in predicting ventricular septal rupture in patients with anterior wall acute myocardial infarction.  Am J Cardiol [Medline] 
       Lemery R, Smith HC, Giuliani ER, Gersh BJ. Prognosis in rupture of the ventricular septum after acute myocardial infarction and role of early surgical intervention.  Am J Cardiol [Medline] 
       [Guideline] O'Gara PT, Kushner FG, Ascheim DD, et al. 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of ST-elevation myocardial infarction: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines.  J Am Coll Cardiol [Medline] 
       Demondion P, Fournel L, Golmard JL, Niculescu M, Pavie A, Leprince P. Predictors of 30-day mortality and outcome in cases of myocardial infarction with cardiogenic shock treated by extracorporeal life support.  Eur J Cardiothorac Surg [Medline] 
       Pandis D, Grapsa J, Athanasiou T, Punjabi P, Nihoyannopoulos P. Left ventricular remodeling and mitral valve surgery: Prospective study with real-time 3-dimensional echocardiography and speckle tracking.  J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg [Medline] 
       Picard MH,  Davidoff R,  Sleeper LA,  Mendes LA,  Thompson CR,  Dzavik V, et al. Echocardiographic predictors of survival and response to early revascularization in cardiogenic shock.  Circulation [Medline] 
       Kinn JW, O'Neill WW, Benzuly KH, Jones DE, Grines CL. Primary angioplasty reduces risk of myocardial rupture compared to thrombolysis for acute myocardial infarction.  Cathet Cardiovasc Diagn [Medline] 
       Kishon Y, Oh JK, Schaff HV, Mullany CJ, Tajik AJ, Gersh BJ. Mitral valve operation in postinfarction rupture of a papillary muscle: immediate results and long-term follow-up of 22 patients.  Mayo Clin Proc [Medline] 
       Sorita A, Lennon RJ, Haydour Q, et al. Off-hour admission and outcomes for patients with acute myocardial infarction undergoing percutaneous coronary interventions.  Am Heart J [Medline]

Article 4:

   
     Heatstroke 
       Heatstroke: Background, Pathophysiology, Epidemiology Heatstroke Clinical Presentation: History, Physical, Causes Heatstroke Differential Diagnoses Heatstroke Workup: Laboratory Studies, Imaging Studies, Other Tests Heatstroke Treatment & Management: Medical Care, Surgical Care, Consultations Heatstroke Medication: Benzodiazepines, Alkalinizing agents, Diuretics (osmotic), Adrenergic agonist agents Heatstroke Follow-up: Further Outpatient Care, Further Inpatient Care, Deterrence/Prevention 
       Heatstroke: Background, Pathophysiology, Epidemiology Heatstroke Clinical Presentation: History, Physical, Causes Heatstroke Differential Diagnoses Heatstroke Workup: Laboratory Studies, Imaging Studies, Other Tests Heatstroke Treatment & Management: Medical Care, Surgical Care, Consultations Heatstroke Medication: Benzodiazepines, Alkalinizing agents, Diuretics (osmotic), Adrenergic agonist agents Heatstroke Follow-up: Further Outpatient Care, Further Inpatient Care, Deterrence/Prevention 
       Overview
 Background Pathophysiology Epidemiology Racial and sexual disparities in incidence Age-related disparities in incidence Presentation
 History Physical Causes Differential Diagnoses
 Workup
 Laboratory Studies Imaging Studies Other Tests Procedures Treatment
 Medical Care Surgical Care Consultations Diet and Activity Medication
 Follow-up
 Further Outpatient Care Further Inpatient Care Deterrence/Prevention Complications Prognosis Patient Education 
       Heatstroke Overview Heatstroke Clinical Presentation Heatstroke Differential Diagnoses Heatstroke Workup Heatstroke Treatment Heatstroke Medication Heatstroke Follow-up 166320-overview May 01, 2015 2015-08-04-20:27 0 Emergency Medicine 2002 Diseases & Conditions Condition 
       1 2 content 166320 502 34 ssg 
     Jun 04, 2015 
       condition Diseases & Conditions 
       emergency_medicine Emergency Medicine 
       emergency_medicine_environmental Environmental heatstroke, heatstroke symptoms, heatstroke signs, heatstroke causes, heatstroke treatment, heat stroke, hyperthermia, heat-related diseases, heat illness, heat rash, heat edema, heat cramps Heat illness may be viewed as a continuum of illnesses relating to the body's inability to cope with heat. It includes minor illnesses, such as heat edema, heat rash (ie, prickly heat), heat cramps, and tetany, as well as heat syncope and heat exhaustion. 0 Heatstroke 
     Overview 
       Background 
         Heat illness may be viewed as a continuum of illnesses relating to the body's inability to cope with heat. It includes minor illnesses, such as heat edema, heat rash (ie, prickly heat), heat cramps, and tetany, as well as heat syncope and heat exhaustion. Heatstroke is the most severe form of the heat-related illnesses and is defined as a body temperature higher than 41.1°C (106°F) associated with neurologic dysfunction.  Two forms of heatstroke exist. Exertional heatstroke (EHS) generally occurs in young individuals who engage in strenuous physical activity for a prolonged period of time in a hot environment. Classic nonexertional heatstroke (NEHS) more commonly affects sedentary elderly individuals, persons who are chronically ill, and very young persons. Classic NEHS occurs during environmental heat waves and is more common in areas that do not typically experience periods of prolonged hot weather. Both types of heatstroke are associated with high morbidity and mortality, especially when cooling therapy is delayed.  With the influence of global warming, it is predicted that the incidence of heatstroke cases and fatalities will also become more prevalent. Behavioral responses are important in the management of temperature elevations and may provide clues to preventing the development of heatstroke. See  Heat Illness: How To Cool Off Hyperthermic Patients 
       Pathophysiology 
         Despite wide variations in ambient temperatures, humans and other mammals can maintain a constant body temperature by balancing heat gain with heat loss. When heat gain overwhelms the body's mechanisms of heat loss, the body temperature rises, potentially leading to heatstroke. Excessive heat denatures proteins, destabilizes phospholipids and lipoproteins, and liquefies membrane lipids, leading to cardiovascular collapse, multiorgan failure, and, ultimately, death. The exact temperature at which cardiovascular collapse occurs varies among individuals because coexisting disease, drugs, and other factors may contribute to or delay organ dysfunction. Full recovery has been observed in patients with temperatures as high as 46°C, and death has occurred in patients with much lower temperatures. Temperatures exceeding 106°F or 41.1°C generally are catastrophic and require immediate aggressive therapy.  Heat may be acquired by a number of different mechanisms. At rest, basal metabolic processes produce approximately 100 kcal of heat per hour or 1 kcal/kg/h. These reactions can raise the body temperature by 1.1°C/h if the heat-dissipating mechanisms are nonfunctional. Strenuous physical activity can increase heat production more than 10-fold, to levels exceeding 1000 kcal/h. Similarly, fever, shivering, tremors, convulsions,  thyrotoxicosis sepsis The body also can acquire heat from the environment through some of the same mechanisms involved in heat dissipation, including conduction, convection, and radiation. These mechanisms occur at the level of the skin and require a properly functioning skin surface, sweat glands, and autonomic nervous system, but they also may be manipulated by behavioral responses. Conduction refers to the transfer of heat between 2 surfaces with differing temperatures that are in direct contact. Convection refers to the transfer of heat between the body's surface and a gas or fluid with a differing temperature. Radiation refers to the transfer of heat in the form of electromagnetic waves between the body and its surroundings. The efficacy of radiation as a means of heat transfer depends on the position of the sun, the season, clouds, and other factors. For example, during summer, lying down in the sun can result in a heat gain of up to 150 kcal/h.  Under normal physiologic conditions, heat gain is counteracted by a commensurate heat loss. This is orchestrated by the hypothalamus, which functions as a thermostat, guiding the body through mechanisms of heat production or heat dissipation, thereby maintaining the body temperature at a constant physiologic range. In a simplified model, thermosensors located in the skin, muscles, and spinal cord send information regarding the core body temperature to the anterior hypothalamus, where the information is processed and appropriate physiologic and behavioral responses are generated. Physiologic responses to heat include an increase in cardiac output and blood flow to the skin (as much as 8 L/min), which is the major heat-dissipating organ; dilatation of the peripheral venous system; and stimulation of the eccrine sweat glands to produce more sweat.  As the major heat-dissipating organ, the skin can transfer heat to the environment through conduction, convection, radiation, and evaporation. Radiation is the most important mechanism of heat transfer at rest in temperate climates, accounting for 65% of heat dissipation, and it can be modulated by clothing. At high ambient temperatures, conduction becomes the least important of the 4 mechanisms, while evaporation, which refers to the conversion of a liquid to a gaseous phase, becomes the most effective mechanism of heat loss.  The efficacy of evaporation as a mechanism of heat loss depends on the condition of the skin and sweat glands, the function of the lung, ambient temperature, humidity, air movement, and whether or not the person is acclimated to the high temperatures. For example, evaporation does not occur when the ambient humidity exceeds 75% and is less effective in individuals who are not acclimated. Nonacclimated individuals can only produce 1 L of sweat per hour, which only dispels 580 kcal of heat per hour, whereas acclimated individuals can produce 2-3 L of sweat per hour and can dissipate as much as 1740 kcal of heat per hour through evaporation. Acclimatization to hot environments usually occurs over 7-10 days and enables individuals to reduce the threshold at which sweating begins, increase sweat production, and increase the capacity of the sweat glands to reabsorb sweat sodium, thereby increasing the efficiency of heat dissipation.  When heat gain exceeds heat loss, the body temperature rises. Classic heatstroke occurs in individuals who lack the capacity to modulate the environment (eg, infants, elderly individuals, individuals who are chronically ill). Furthermore, elderly persons and patients with diminished cardiovascular reserves are unable to generate and cope with the physiologic responses to heat stress and, therefore, are at risk of heatstroke. Patients with skin diseases and those taking medications that interfere with sweating also are at increased risk for heatstroke because they are unable to dissipate heat adequately. Additionally, the redistribution of blood flow to the periphery, coupled with the loss of fluids and electrolytes in sweat, place a tremendous burden on the heart, which ultimately may fail to maintain an adequate cardiac output, leading to additional morbidity and mortality.  Factors that interfere with heat dissipation include an inadequate intravascular volume, cardiovascular dysfunction, and abnormal skin. Additionally, high ambient temperatures, high ambient humidity, and many drugs can interfere with heat dissipation, resulting in a major heat illness. Similarly, hypothalamic dysfunction may alter temperature regulation and may result in an unchecked rise in temperature and heat illness.  On a cellular level, heat directly influences the body by interfering with cellular processes along with denaturing proteins and cellular membranes. In turn, an array of inflammatory cytokines, interleukins and heat shock proteins (HSPs) are produced. In particular, HSP-70 allows the cell to endure the stress of its environment. If the stress continues, the cell will succumb to the stress (apoptosis) and die. On a microvascular level, heat stroke resembles sepsis and involves inflammation, translocation of lipopolysaccharides from the gut, and activates the coagulation cascade. Certain preexisting factors, such as age, genetic makeup, and the nonacclimatized individual, may allow progression from heat stress to heatstroke, systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS), multiorgan dysfunction syndrome (MODS), and ultimately death. Progression to heatstroke may occur through thermoregulatory failure, an amplified acute-phase response, and alterations in the expression of HSPs. An index used by some, including the American College of Sports Medicine, is the Wet Bulb Globe Temperature (WBGT). It is an environmental heat stress index used to evaluate the risk of heat of heat-related illness on an individual. It is calculated using 3 parameters: temperature, humidity, and radiant heat. There is low risk if the WBGT is < 65ºF, moderate risk if it is between 65-73ºF, high risk if between 73-82ºF, and very high risk if >82ºF.  
       Epidemiology 
         Frequency 
           United States In the United States, heat waves claim more lives each year than all other weather-related exposures combined (hurricanes, tornadoes, floods, and earthquakes). [ [ Heatstroke and deaths from excessive heat exposure are more common during summers with prolonged heat waves. For example, during the heat wave of 1980 (a record year for heat), 1700 deaths were attributed to heat, compared to only 148 deaths attributed to heat the previous year. Persons older than 65 years accounted for at least 44% of cases. The numbers published by the NCHS are believed to grossly underestimate the true incidence of heat-related deaths because death rates from other causes (eg, cardiovascular disease, respiratory disease) also increase during the summer, and especially during heat waves.  
           International Heatstroke is uncommon in subtropical climates. The condition is recognized increasingly in countries that experience heat waves rarely (eg, Japan), and it commonly affects people who undertake a pilgrimage to Mecca, especially pilgrims who come from a cold environment. In 1998, one of the worst heat waves to strike India in 50 years resulted in more than 2600 deaths in 10 weeks. Unofficial reports described the number of deaths as almost double that figure.  
         Mortality/Morbidity Morbidity and mortality from heatstroke are related to the duration of the temperature elevation. When therapy is delayed, the mortality rate may be as high as 80%; however, with early diagnosis and immediate cooling, the mortality rate can be reduced to 10%. Mortality is highest among the elderly population, patients with preexisting disease, those confined to a bed, and those who are socially isolated.  
       Racial and sexual disparities in incidence 
         With the same risk factors and under the same environmental conditions, heatstroke affects all races equally. However, because of differences in social advantages, the annual death rate due to environmental conditions is more than 3 times higher in blacks than in whites. With the same risk factors and under the same environmental conditions, heatstroke affects both genders equally. However, because of gender differences in the workforce, the annual death rate due to environmental conditions is 2 times higher in men than in women.  
       Age-related disparities in incidence 
         Infants, children, and elderly persons have a higher incidence of heatstroke than young, healthy adults. Infants and children are at risk for heat illness due to inefficient sweating, a higher metabolic rate, and their inability to care for themselves and control their environment.  Elderly persons also are at increased risk for heat-related illnesses because of their limited cardiovascular reserves, preexisting illness, and use of many medications that may affect their volume status or sweating ability. In addition, elderly people who are unable to care for themselves are at increased risk for heatstroke, presumably because of their inability to control their environment.  Exertional heat stroke (EHS) is a leading cause of injury and death in high school athletes; approximately two-thirds of such cases occur in August and involve football players, often those who are obese or overweight. [ 
     Clinical Presentation 
       History 
         Heatstroke is defined typically as hyperthermia exceeding 41°C and anhidrosis associated with an altered sensorium. However, when a patient is allowed to cool down prior to measurement of the temperature (as may occur during transportation in a cool ambulance or evaluation in an emergency department), the measured temperature may be much lower than 41°C, making the temperature criterion relative. Similarly, some patients may retain the ability to sweat, removing anhidrosis as a criterion for the diagnosis of heatstroke. Therefore, strict adherence to the definition is not advised because it may result in dangerous delays in diagnosis and therapy.  Clinically, 2 forms of heatstroke are differentiated: classic, or nonexertional, heatstroke (NEHS) and exertional heatstroke (EHS). Classic heatstroke, which occurs during environmental heat waves, is more common in the very young and the elderly and should be suspected in children, elderly persons, and chronically ill individuals who present with an altered sensorium. Classic heatstroke occurs because of failure of the body's heat dissipating mechanisms.  On the other hand, EHS affects young, healthy individuals who engage in strenuous physical activity, and EHS should be suspected in all such individuals who exhibit bizarre, irrational behavior or experience syncope. EHS results from increased heat production, which overwhelms the body's ability to dissipate heat. 
         Exertional heatstroke EHS is characterized by hyperthermia, diaphoresis, and an altered sensorium, which may manifest suddenly during extreme physical exertion in a hot environment.  A number of symptoms (eg, abdominal and muscular cramping, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, headache, dizziness, dyspnea, weakness) commonly precede the heatstroke and may remain unrecognized. Syncope and loss of consciousness also are observed commonly before the development of EHS.  EHS commonly is observed in young, healthy individuals (eg, athletes, firefighters, military personnel) who, while engaging in strenuous physical activity, overwhelm their thermoregulatory system and become hyperthermic. Because their ability to sweat remains intact, patients with EHS are able to cool down after cessation of physical activity and may present for medical attention with temperatures well below 41°C. Despite education and preventive measures, EHS is still a leading cause of disability and death in high school athletes, particularly football players. [ Risk factors that increase the likelihood of heat-related illnesses include a preceding viral infection, dehydration, fatigue, obesity, lack of sleep, poor physical fitness, and lack of acclimatization. Although lack of acclimatization is a risk factor for heatstroke, EHS also can occur in acclimatized individuals who are subjected to moderately intense exercise. EHS also may occur because of increased motor activity due to drug use, such as cocaine and amphetamines, and as a complication of status epilepticus.  
         Nonexertional heatstroke NEHS is characterized by hyperthermia, anhidrosis, and an altered sensorium, which develop suddenly after a period of prolonged elevations in ambient temperatures (ie, heat waves). Core body temperatures greater than 41°C are diagnostic, although heatstroke may occur with lower core body temperatures.  Numerous central nervous system (CNS) symptoms, ranging from minor irritability to delusions, irrational behavior, hallucinations, and coma have been described. Other possible CNS symptoms include seizures, cranial nerve abnormalities, cerebellar dysfunction, and opisthotonos.  Anhidrosis due to cessation of sweating is a late occurrence in heatstroke and may not be present when patients are examined. Patients with NEHS initially may exhibit a hyperdynamic circulatory state, but, in severe cases, hypodynamic states may be noted.  Classic heatstroke most commonly occurs during episodes of prolonged elevations in ambient temperatures. It affects people who are unable to control their environment and water intake (eg, infants, elderly persons, individuals who are chronically ill), people with reduced cardiovascular reserve (eg, elderly persons, patients with chronic cardiovascular illnesses), and people with impaired sweating (eg, from skin disease or ingestion of anticholinergic or psychiatric drugs). In addition, infants have an immature thermoregulatory system, and elderly persons have impaired perception of changes in body and ambient temperatures and a decreased capacity to sweat. 
       Physical 
         Vital signs Temperature: Typically, the patient's temperature exceeds 41°C. However, in the presence of sweating, evaporating mechanisms, and the initiation of cooling methods, body temperatures lower than 41°C are common.  Pulse: Tachycardia to rates exceeding 130 beats per minute is common. Blood pressure: Patients commonly are normotensive, with a wide pulse pressure; however, hypotension is common and may result from a number of factors, including vasodilation of the cutaneous vessels, pooling of the blood in the venous system, and dehydration. Hypotension also may be due to myocardial damage and may signal cardiovascular collapse. Blood pressure will usually correct with normalization of the body temperature.  
         Central nervous system Symptoms of CNS dysfunction are present universally in persons with heatstroke. Symptoms may range from irritability to coma. Patients may present with delirium, confusion, delusions, convulsions, hallucinations, ataxia, tremors, dysarthria, and other cerebellar findings, as well as cranial nerve abnormalities and tonic and dystonic contractions of the muscles. Patients also may exhibit decerebrate posturing, decorticate posturing, or they may be limp.  Coma also may be caused by electrolyte abnormalities, hypoglycemia, hepatic encephalopathy, uremic encephalopathy, and acute structural abnormalities, such as intracerebral hemorrhage due to trauma or coagulation disorders.  Cerebral edema and herniation also may occur during the course of heatstroke. 
         Eyes Examination of the eyes may reveal nystagmus and oculogyric episodes due to cerebellar injury. The pupils may be fixed, dilated, pinpoint, or normal.  
         Cardiovascular Heat stress places a tremendous burden on the heart. Patients with preexisting myocardial dysfunction do not tolerate heat stress for prolonged periods.  Patients commonly exhibit a hyperdynamic state, with tachycardia, low systemic vascular resistance, and a high cardiac index. However, a hypodynamic state, with a high systemic vascular resistance and a low cardiac index, may occur in patients with preexisting cardiovascular disease and low intravascular volume. A hypodynamic state also may signal cardiovascular collapse.  The central venous pressure generally is within the reference range or elevated unless the patient is severely volume depleted. High-output cardiac failure and low-output cardiac failure may occur. 
         Pulmonary Patients with heatstroke commonly exhibit tachypnea and hyperventilation caused by direct CNS stimulation, acidosis, or hypoxia. Hypoxia and cyanosis may be due to a number of processes, including atelectasis, pulmonary infarction, aspiration pneumonia, and pulmonary edema.  
         Gastrointestinal Gastrointestinal hemorrhage occurs frequently in patients with heatstroke.  
         Hepatic Patients commonly exhibit evidence of hepatic injury, including jaundice and elevated liver enzymes. Rarely, fulminant hepatic failure occurs, accompanied by encephalopathy, hypoglycemia, and disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) and bleeding.  
         Musculoskeletal Muscle tenderness and cramping are common; rhabdomyolysis is a common complication of EHS. The patient's muscles may be rigid or limp.  
         Renal Acute kidney injury is a common complication of heatstroke and may be due to hypovolemia, low cardiac output, and myoglobinuria (from rhabdomyolysis). Patients may exhibit oliguria and a change in the color of urine.  
       Causes 
         The etiology of heatstroke may involve any of the following: 
           
             Increased heat production 
             Decreased heat loss 
             Reduced ability to acclimatize 
             Reduced behavioral responsiveness 
         Increased heat production Increased metabolism can result from any of the following:  
           
             Infections 
             Sepsis 
             Encephalitis 
             Stimulant drugs 
             
               Thyroid storm 
             Drug withdrawal Increased muscular activity may involve any of the following: 
           
             Exercise 
             Convulsions 
             
               Tetanus 
             Strychnine poisoning 
             Sympathomimetics 
             Drug withdrawal 
             Thyroid storm Moderate physical exercise, convulsions, and shivering can double heat production and result in temperature elevations that generally are self-limited and resolve with discontinuation of the activity.  Strenuous exercise and status epilepticus can increase heat production 10-fold and, when uninterrupted, can overwhelm the body's heat-dissipating mechanisms, leading to dangerous rises in body temperature.  Stimulant drugs, including cocaine and amphetamines, can generate excessive amounts of heat by increasing metabolism and motor activity through the stimulatory effects of dopamine, serotonin, and norepinephrine. The development of heatstroke in individuals intoxicated with stimulants is multifactorial and may involve a complex interaction between dopamine and serotonin in the hypothalamus and the brainstem.  Neuroleptic agents also may elevate body temperature by increasing muscle activity, but, occasionally, these agents may cause  neuroleptic malignant syndrome Certain drugs, such as inhaled volatile anesthetics and succinylcholine, may result in malignant hyperthermia. In contrast to heatstroke,  malignant hyperthermia 
         Decreased heat loss Reduced sweating can result from any of the following: 
           
             Dermatologic diseases 
             Drugs 
             Burns Reduced central nervous system (CNS) responses may result from the following: 
           
             Advanced age 
             Young age (toddlers and infants) 
             Alcohol 
             Barbiturates 
             Other sedatives Reduced cardiovascular reserve may result from the following: 
           
             Advanced age 
             Beta-blockers 
             Calcium channel blockers 
             Diuretics 
             Cardiovascular drugs - Interfere with the cardiovascular responses to heat and, therefore, can interfere with heat loss Drugs that can result in decreased heat loss include the following: 
           
             Anticholinergics 
             Neuroleptics 
             Antihistamines Exogenous factors that can decrease heat loss include the following: 
           
             High ambient temperatures 
             High ambient humidity 
         Reduced ability to acclimatize Persons at the extremes of age (ie, toddlers and young children, the elderly) may be less able to generate adequate physiologic responses to heat stress. Diuretic use and hypokalemia can also impair accommodation to heat stress.  
         Reduced behavioral responsiveness Infants, patients who are bedridden, and patients who are chronically ill are at risk for heatstroke because they are unable to control their environment and water intake. To compound matters, comorbidities and polypharmacy in the elderly can compromise their recovery.  
     Differential Diagnoses 
       Diagnostic Considerations Other problems to be considered include the following: 
         
           Sepsis 
           Diabetic ketoacidosis 
           Closed head trauma 
           Malignant hyperthermia 
           Encephalitis 
           Cerebral malaria 
           Cerebral hemorrhage 
           Amphetamine and cocaine toxicity 
           Strychnine poisoning 
       
         Cocaine Toxicity 
         Delirium 
         Delirium Tremens (DTs) 
         Hepatic Encephalopathy 
         Hyperthyroidism 
         Meningitis 
         Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome 
         Salicylate Toxicity 
         Tetanus 
         Uremic Encephalopathy 
     Workup 
       Laboratory Studies 
         Arterial blood gas testing Arterial blood gas 
         Lactic acidosis   Lactic acidosis 
         Glucose Hypoglycemia may occur in patients with EHS and in patients with fulminant hepatic failure.  
         Electrolytes 
           Sodium Hypernatremia Hyponatremia 
           Potassium Hypokalemia hyperkalemia 
           Other Hypophosphatemia hyperphosphatemia hypocalcemia hypomagnesemia 
         Hepatic function tests Hepatic injury is a consistent finding in patients with heatstroke. Aminotransferase (aspartate aminotransferase [AST] and alanine aminotransferase [ALT]) llevels commonly rise to the tens of thousands during the early phases of heatstroke and peak at 48 hours, but they may take as long as 2 weeks to peak.  Jaundice may be striking and may be noted 36-72 hours after the onset of liver failure. 
         Muscle function tests Creatinine kinase (CK), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), aldolase, and myoglobin commonly are released from muscles when muscle necrosis occurs.  CK levels exceeding 100,000 IU/mL are common in patients with EHS. Elevations in myoglobin may not be noted despite muscle necrosis because myoglobin is metabolized rapidly by the liver and excreted rapidly by the kidneys.  
         Complete blood cell count Elevated white blood cell counts commonly are observed in patients with heatstroke, and levels as high as 40,000/μ L have been reported. Platelet levels may be low.  
         Renal function tests Elevations in serum uric acid levels, blood urea nitrogen, and serum creatinine are common in patients whose course is complicated by renal failure.  
         Urinalysis Remember that urinary benzidine dipsticks do not differentiate between blood, hemoglobin, and myoglobin. Urine dipstick analyses that are positive for blood must be followed by a microscopic urinalysis to determine the presence or absence of red blood cells. Proteinuria also is common.  
         Cerebrospinal fluid analysis Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) cell counts may show a nonspecific pleocytosis, and CSF protein levels may be elevated as high as 150 mg/dL.  
         Other Myoglobin causes a reddish brown discoloration of the urine but does not affect the color of plasma. This is in contrast to hemoglobin, which causes discoloration of both plasma and urine.  
       Imaging Studies 
         Computerized tomography scans may be helpful in ruling out CNS injury in patients with altered mental status. Chest radiographs may show atelectasis, pneumonia, pulmonary infarction, or pulmonary edema. 
       Other Tests 
         Electrocardiography: Sinus tachycardia of 130-140 beats per minute and nonspecific and ischemic ST-T wave abnormalities are common. In addition, a number of conduction abnormalities (eg, right bundle branch block), prolonged QT interval) may be noted.  
       Procedures 
         Procedures may include the following: 
           
             Endotracheal intubation 
             Pulmonary artery catheter insertion 
             Central venous line insertion 
             Nasogastric tube insertion 
             
               Lumbar puncture 
             Compartment pressure measurements 
             Fasciotomy 
             Thoracostomy 
             Peritoneal lavage 
             Hemodialysis 
     Treatment & Management 
       Medical Care 
         Heatstroke is a medical emergency and continues to be one of the leading causes of preventable death in sports. [ Once heatstroke is suspected, cooling must begin immediately and must be continued during the patient's resuscitation. The American College of Sports Medicine recommends that cooling be initiated at the scene, before transporting the patient to an emergency department for further evaluation and treatment. [ [ Controversy still exists over what therapeutic modality is most effective in the treatment of heatstroke. However, the basic premise of rapidly lowering the core temperature to about 39°C (to avoid overshooting and rebound hyperthermia) remains the primary goal. According to one study, oral temperature assessments consistently reflected inaccurate core body temperatures, which delayed the diagnosis and ultimate treatment of patients with heatstroke. Rectal temperatures are still the preferred method of accurately obtaining core body temperatures. [ Some studies have shown that promptly reducing the exposure time to excessive heat can dramatically improve long-term outcomes and decrease irreversible injury. If treatment is initiated within this so-called golden hour and is aggressive enough to rapidly reduce the core body temperature, complications (including multisystem organ failure) may be averted and the patient may have a much better prognosis. [ In a review of 19 clinical trials and observational studies involving 556 patients, the conduction method of cooling was found to be more efficacious in young, active adults with EHS. Unfortunately, this review did not identify a preferred treatment found for NEHS, or a temperature endpoint to prevent overcooling. [ Removal of restrictive clothing and spraying water on the body, covering the patient with ice water–soaked sheets, or placing ice packs in the axillae and groin may reduce the patient's temperature significantly. Patients who are unable to protect their airway should be intubated. Patients who are awake and responsive should receive supplemental oxygen. Intravenous lines may be placed in anticipation of fluid resuscitation and for the infusion of dextrose and thiamine if indicated. Hypoglycemia is a common occurrence in patients with EHS and may be a manifestation of liver failure; therefore, infusion of dextrose 50% in water solution (D50W) should be considered in all patients with heatstroke. Intensive care personnel must pay meticulous attention to the airway, reduce the temperature, limit the production of heat, optimize circulation, and monitor for and treat complications. Interventions to enable monitoring include the following:  
           
             Insert a thermistor probe or temperature-sensing Foley catheter to monitor temperature continuously 
             Insert a nasogastric tube to monitor for gastrointestinal bleeding and fluid losses 
             Place a Foley catheter to monitor urine output and/or monitor body temperature The goal of treatment is to reduce the temperature by at least 0.2°C/min to approximately 39°C. Active external cooling generally is halted at 39°C to prevent overshooting, which can result in iatrogenic hypothermia. A flexible indwelling thermistor rectally or an esophageal probe can be placed to monitor core body temperature during treatment; alternatively, a more modern method is to use a temperature-sensing Foley catheter. Because thermal instability may persist for a few days after the onset of heatstroke, the temperature must be monitored continuously until it is stable.  
         Methods for cooling The optimal method of rapidly cooling patients has been a matter of debate for some time. A 2013 guideline from the Wilderness Medical Society recommends ice-water immersion as a superior method for rapidly lowering core body temperature below the critical levels normally found in heatstroke patients. [ Ice-water immersion or an equivalent method has the advantage of rapidly reducing core body temperature. Because of its high thermal conductivity, ice water can reduce core body temperature to less than 39°C in approximately 20-40 minutes. The disadvantages of ice-water immersion include the fact that it may be extremely uncomfortable for patients who are awake. In addition, in theory it can cause subcutaneous vasoconstriction, preventing the transfer of heat via conduction. Ice water also increases shivering, which in turn increases internal heat production. Other criticisms include difficulty monitoring and resuscitating patients while using this method.  Evaporative heat loss, although perhaps less effective than immersion techniques, poses fewer practical difficulties. Evaporative body heat loss may be accomplished by removing all of the patient's clothes and intermittently spraying the patient's body with warm water while a powerful fan blows across the body, allowing the heat to evaporate.  A number of other cooling techniques have been suggested, but none has proven superior to or equal to cold-water immersion or evaporative techniques. These include peritoneal, thoracic, rectal, and gastric lavage with ice water; cold intravenous fluids; cold humidified oxygen; cooling blankets; and wet towels.  Cardiopulmonary bypass has been suggested for use in the most severe cases. However, this requires highly trained personnel and sophisticated equipment.  
         Pharmacologic measures Antipyretics (eg, acetaminophen, aspirin, other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) have no role in the treatment of heatstroke because antipyretics interrupt the change in the hypothalamic set point caused by pyrogens; they are not expected to work on a healthy hypothalamus that has been overloaded, as in the case of heatstroke. In this situation, antipyretics actually may be harmful in patients who develop hepatic, hematologic, and renal complications because they may aggravate bleeding tendencies.  Dantrolene has been studied as a possible pharmacologic option in the treatment of hyperthermia and heatstroke. To date, however, it has not proved efficacious in clinical trials.  Immediate administration of benzodiazepines is indicated in patients with agitation and shivering, to stop excessive production of heat. In addition, benzodiazepines are the sedatives of choice in patients with sympathomimetic-induced delirium as well as alcohol and sedative drug withdrawals.  Neuroleptics (eg, chlorpromazine), which were the mainstays of therapy in the past, are best avoided because of their deleterious adverse effects, including lowering of the seizure threshold, interference with thermoregulation, anticholinergic properties, hypotension, hepatotoxicity, and other adverse effects.  Benzodiazepines and, if necessary, barbiturates are the recommended agents for treatment of patients who are having convulsions. Barbiturates may be used despite their theoretical impedance of sweat production.  Phenytoin is not effective in controlling convulsions in this situation. Patients whose convulsions are refractory to benzodiazepines and barbiturates should be paralyzed and provided mechanical ventilation. Electroencephalographic monitoring is recommended in all such patients, and anticonvulsant medications should be adjusted accordingly.  
         Fluid resuscitation Recommendations on the administration of intravenous fluids for circulatory support differ among patient populations and depend on the presence of hypovolemia, preexisting medical conditions, and preexisting cardiovascular disease.  While patients with heatstroke invariably are volume depleted, cooling alone may improve hypotension and cardiac function by allowing blood to redistribute centrally. Aggressive fluid resuscitation generally is not recommended because it may lead to pulmonary edema. Cor pulmonale also is a common finding in patients with heatstroke.  When pulse rate, blood pressure, and urine output do not provide adequate hemodynamic information, fluid administration should be guided by more invasive hemodynamic parameters, such as central venous pressure (CVP), pulmonary capillary wedge pressure, systemic vascular resistance index (SVRI), and cardiac index (CI) measurements. Patients who exhibit a hyperdynamic state (ie, high CI, low SVRI) generally respond to cooling and do not require large amounts of intravenous crystalloid infusions. Hypotensive patients who exhibit a hypodynamic response (ie, high CVP, low CI) traditionally have been treated with low-dose isoproterenol; however, its arrhythmogenicity has raised questions about its continued use. Dobutamine, which is less arrhythmogenic than isoproterenol and more cardioselective, may be the inotrope of choice in these patients. Alpha-adrenergic drugs generally are contraindicated because they cause vasoconstriction and may interfere with heat loss.  
         Rhabdomyolysis The occurrence of  rhabdomyolysis acute kidney injury Treatment of rhabdomyolysis involves infusion of large amounts of intravenous fluids (fluid requirements may be as high as 10 L), alkalinization of the urine, and infusion of mannitol. Fluid administration is best guided by invasive hemodynamic parameters, and urine output should be maintained at 3 ml/kg/h to minimize the risk of renal failure.  Alkalinization of the urine (to a pH of 7.5-8.0) prevents the precipitation of myoglobin in the renal tubules and may control acidosis and hyperkalemia in acute massive muscle necrosis. Mannitol may improve renal blood flow and glomerular filtration rate, increase urine output, and prevent fluid accumulation in the interstitial compartment (through its osmotic action). Mannitol also is a free radical scavenger and, therefore, may reduce damage caused by free radicals. Once renal failure occurs, dialysis is the only effective therapeutic modality for rhabdomyolysis.  
         Metabolic support Muscle necrosis may occur so rapidly that hyperkalemia, hypocalcemia, and hyperphosphatemia become significant enough to cause cardiac arrhythmias and require immediate therapy. In the presence of renal failure, hemodialysis may be necessary. Hypertonic dextrose and sodium bicarbonate may be used to shift potassium into the intracellular environment while more definitive measures (eg, intestinal potassium binding, dialysis) are prepared. Use of insulin may not be necessary in patients who are not diabetic and may be deleterious for patients with EHS and patients with liver failure, who commonly develop hypoglycemia.  Calcium should be used judiciously because it may precipitate in and cause additional muscle damage. Use of calcium is reserved for patients with ventricular ectopy, impending convulsions, or electrocardiographic evidence of hyperkalemia.  Various other electrolyte abnormalities have been reported in patients with heatstroke and must be monitored closely and treated carefully. These abnormalities may be related to solute-altering conditions such as vomiting, diarrhea, and use of diuretics. For example, hypokalemia, which is common in the early phases of heatstroke, may develop in response to respiratory alkalosis, diarrhea, and sweating. Similarly, hyponatremia may be due to sodium losses and/or rehydration with salt-poor solutions (eg, water), and hypernatremia may be due to dehydration.  
         Hepatic injury Heatstroke commonly leads to severe but reversible hepatic damage. Hepatic injury is represented by elevations in transaminase levels and bilirubin. During this phase, hypoglycemia, abnormal coagulation, cerebral edema, and death can occur, although rarely.  Prolonged coagulation times also may signal the development of  disseminated intravascular coagulation Treatment of hepatic failure includes the following: 
           
             Infusion of dextrose solutions to correct hypoglycemia 
             Early recognition and treatment of DIC, with replacement of clotting factors, fresh frozen plasma, platelets, and blood 
             Meticulous respiratory support 
         Pulmonary injury Pulmonary edema is a common complication of heatstroke and may be due to a number of factors, including fluid overload from aggressive rehydration, renal failure, congestive heart failure, and ARDS. The latter may develop because of multiple insults, including heat-induced pulmonary damage, aspiration pneumonia, and as a complication of liver failure. ARDS should be treated aggressively, with early mechanical ventilation and positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP).  
         Renal injury AKI may occur because of direct thermal injury of the kidney, myoglobinuria, hypotension, and/or shock ( acute tubular necrosis AKI initially is treated with intravenous fluids, diuretics, and correction of associated acid-base and electrolyte abnormalities. In the setting of rhabdomyolysis, mannitol may be the diuretic of choice because it does not interfere with the acid-base status of the urine, and it may have antioxidant activity. Furosemide may cause tubular acidosis and, therefore, may promote myoglobin deposition within the renal tubules. Once renal failure has set in, hemodialysis is the most effective therapy.  
       Surgical Care 
         Compartment syndrome 
       Consultations 
         Consider consultation with a nephrologist as soon as renal failure occurs. Consultation with a surgeon is indicated when compartment syndrome is suspected. Consider consultation with a liver transplant service for patients with persistent fulminant liver failure.  
       Diet and Activity 
         Patients may resume oral feeding when mental status, swallowing, and gastrointestinal tract function are normal.  During the initial phase of therapy, neuromuscular blockade with muscular paralysis should be considered for patients who are not cooling adequately. Depolarizing agents (eg, succinylcholine) and inhaled anesthetics should be avoided because of the risk of malignant hyperthermia. Patients may resume activity when their temperature has stabilized.  
     Medication 
       Medication Summary In patients with heatstroke, benzodiazepines play a major role in providing sedation, controlling convulsions, and controlling shivering. Barbiturates (eg, phenobarbital) may be used to control convulsions if benzodiazepines are not effective. Hypotension is treated first with cooling and intravenous crystalloid fluids; dobutamine is considered if patients are hypodynamic. Treatment of rhabdomyolysis involves infusing large amounts of intravenous fluids (as much as 10 L may be required), alkalinization of urine, and mannitol infusion.  
       Benzodiazepines 
         Class Summary Benzodiazepines are safe and effective in controlling agitation, convulsions, and shivering. 
         Lorazepam (Ativan) Predictability and ease of use make lorazepam the drug of choice in most cases. It may be used intravenously and is well absorbed after intramuscular injection. Its onset of action is within minutes, effects peak in 15-20 minutes, and the duration of action is 6-8 hours.  
         Midazolam (Versed) Midazolam is a rapidly acting benzodiazepine with a short duration of action. It is ideal for sedation during short procedures and may be effective in convulsions.  
       Alkalinizing agents 
         Class Summary Alkalinizing agents are indicated for severe acidosis and rhabdomyolysis. 
         Sodium bicarbonate (Neut) Sodium bicarbonate is useful in alkalization of the urine to prevent acute myoglobinuric renal failure. It may be administered as a bolus injection or as an infusion. The ideal solution to which sodium bicarbonate is added should be hypotonic.  
       Diuretics (osmotic) 
         Class Summary Osmotic effects retain water during urine formation and dilute electrolytes in the urine, making resorption less efficient. 
         Mannitol (Osmitrol) Mannitol is the drug of choice for forced diuresis in patients with rhabdomyolysis because of a number of beneficial effects on the kidneys, including an antioxidant effect.  
       Adrenergic agonist agents 
         Class Summary Adrenergic agonist agents produce vasodilation and increase the inotropic state. 
         Dobutamine (Dobutrex) Dobutamine is a synthetic compound structurally similar to catecholamines. It is the drug of choice for circulatory support in heatstroke.  
     Follow-up 
       Further Outpatient Care 
         Long-term outpatient therapy may be required when chronic renal failure develops and when irreversible damage to the CNS, lungs, heart, and liver occurs.  
       Further Inpatient Care 
         Once the acute phase is stabilized, further inpatient care may be necessary to address the complications of heatstroke. 
       Deterrence/Prevention 
         Heatstroke is a preventable illness, and education is the single most important tool for its prevention. Recognition of host risk factors and modification of behavior (eg, limiting alcohol and drug intake, avoiding use of medications and drugs that interfere with heat dissipation) and physical activity also can prevent heatstroke.  
       Complications 
         Heatstroke is a multisystem insult that potentially can affect almost every organ system.  The central nervous system (CNS) is especially sensitive to the damaging effects of hyperthermia. Widespread cell death occurs but is more evident in the region of the cerebellum (Purkinje cells). Heatstroke–related long-term CNS sequelae include cerebellar deficits, dementia, hemiplegia, quadriparesis, and personality changes.  In one study, rhabdomyolysis was observed in almost all patients with EHS and in as many as 86% of patients with NEHS. Compartment syndrome is observed most commonly in patients with severe rhabdomyolysis and in patients who are immobilized.  Acute kidney injury may occur in as many as 25-30% of patients who have heatstroke (especially EHS). Acute liver failure due to centrilobular hepatic necrosis and cholestasis generally occurs in the first 48 hours, but it can peak as long as 2 weeks after the onset of heatstroke. In rare instances, liver failure may be complicated by a fulminant course requiring liver transplantation. Patients who survive generally have a complete return of hepatic function.  DIC is a rare complication and caries a poor prognosis when it occurs. Electron microscopy studies have shown that direct thermal injury to the vascular endothelium is the primary trigger of platelet aggregation and, possibly, DIC.  ARDS may be due to direct thermal injury to the lung, or it may complicate liver failure, infection, or aspiration. When associated with liver failure, the patient's prognosis is much worse.  
       Prognosis 
         Indicators of poor prognosis during acute episodes include the following: 
           
             Initial temperature measurement higher than 41°C (106°F) or a temperature higher than 42°C (108°F) or a temperature persisting above 39°C (102°F) despite aggressive cooling measures  
             Coma duration longer than 2 hours 
             Severe pulmonary edema 
             Delayed or prolonged hypotension 
             Lactic acidosis in patients with classic heatstroke 
             Acute kidney injury and hyperkalemia 
             Aminotransferase levels greater than 1000 IU/L during the first 24 hours 
       Patient Education 
         Education is the single most important tool for the prevention of heatstroke. The media, public education, public health programs, and athlete safety programs can play a pivotal role in increasing the public's awareness of the dangers of heat during heat waves and advising the public on methods of remaining cool.  Similarly, drinking fluids on schedule (and not based only on thirst), frequent cooling breaks, and frequent visits to air-conditioned places are very important because even short stays in an air-conditioned environment may drastically reduce the incidence of heatstroke.  Recognition of host risk factors and modification of behavior (eg, limiting alcohol and drug intake and the use of medications and drugs that interfere with heat dissipation) and physical activity also will prevent heatstroke.  For patient education information, see the  First Aid and Injuries Center Healthy Living Center Heat Exhaustion and Heat Stroke Heat Cramps 
     
       Author 
         Robert S Helman, MD Director, Premier Care of Great Neck Urgent Care Center Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Coauthor(s) 
         Rania Habal, MD Assistant Professor, Department of Emergency Medicine, New York Medical College Rania Habal, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American Academy of Emergency Medicine Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Pharmacy Editor 
         Francisco Talavera, PharmD, PhD Adjunct Assistant Professor, University of Nebraska Medical Center College of Pharmacy; Editor-in-Chief, Medscape Drug Reference Disclosure: Received salary from Medscape for employment. for: Medscape. 
       Chief Editor 
         Joe Alcock, MD, MS Associate Professor, Department of Emergency Medicine, University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center Joe Alcock, MD, MS is a member of the following medical societies:  American Academy of Emergency Medicine Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Additional Contributors 
         Laurie Robin Grier, MD Medical Director of MICU, Professor of Medicine, Emergency Medicine, Anesthesiology and Obstetrics/Gynecology, Fellowship Director for Critical Care Medicine, Section of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Louisiana State University Health Science Center at Shreveport Laurie Robin Grier, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American College of Chest Physicians American College of Physicians American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition Society of Critical Care Medicine Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
     
       Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Climate Effects on Health. Updated December 22, 2014. Available at  http://www.cdc.gov/climateandhealth/effects/default.htm 
       Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Extreme Heat: A Prevention Guide to Promote Your Personal Health and Safety. Reviewed May 31, 2012. Available at  http://emergency.cdc.gov/disasters/extremeheat/heat_guide.asp 
       Heat illness among high school athletes --- United States, 2005-2009.  MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep [Medline] [Full Text] 
       National Center for Catastrophic Injury Research. Catastrophic sport injury 29th annual report. University of North Carolina. Available at  http://www.unc.edu/depts/nccsi/2011Allsport.pdf 
       [Guideline] American College of Sports Medicine Joint Statement. National Athletic Trainers' Association. Inter-Association Task Force on Exertional Heat Illnesses Consensus Statement. 2003. Available at  http://www.nata.org/sites/default/files/inter-association-task-force-exertional-heat-illness.pdf 
       Mazerolle SM, Pinkus DE, Casa DJ, et al. Evidence-based medicine and the recognition and treatment of exertional heat stroke, part II: a perspective from the clinical athletic trainer.  J Athl Train [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Mazerolle SM, Ganio MS, Casa DJ, Vingren J, Klau J. Is oral temperature an accurate measurement of deep body temperature? A systematic review.  J Athl Train [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Heled Y, Rav-Acha M, Shani Y, Epstein Y, Moran DS. The "golden hour" for heatstroke treatment.  Mil Med [Medline] 
       Bouchama A, Dehbi M, Chaves-Carballo E. Cooling and hemodynamic management in heatstroke:  practical recommendations.  Critical Care 2007 [Full Text] 
       [Guideline] Lipman GS, Eifling KP, Ellis MA, Gaudio FG, Otten EM, Grissom CK. Wilderness Medical Society practice guidelines for the prevention and treatment of heat-related illness.  Wilderness Environ Med [Medline]

Article 5:

   
     Tilt-Table Testing 
       Tilt-Table Testing: Background, Indications, Contraindications Tilt-Table Testing Periprocedural Care: Patient Education & Consent, Equipment, Patient Preparation Tilt-Table Testing Technique: Approach Considerations, Tilt-Table Testing, Test Results Tilt-Table Testing Medication: Vasodilators, Beta1/Beta2 Adrenergic Agonists, Isotonic Crystalloids 
       Tilt-Table Testing: Background, Indications, Contraindications Tilt-Table Testing Periprocedural Care: Patient Education & Consent, Equipment, Patient Preparation Tilt-Table Testing Technique: Approach Considerations, Tilt-Table Testing, Test Results Tilt-Table Testing Medication: Vasodilators, Beta1/Beta2 Adrenergic Agonists, Isotonic Crystalloids 
       Overview
 Background Indications Contraindications Technical Considerations Outcomes Periprocedural Care
 Patient Education & Consent Equipment Patient Preparation Monitoring & Follow-up Technique
 Approach Considerations Tilt-Table Testing Test Results Definitions of Key Terms Web Links Medication
 
       Tilt-Table Testing Overview Tilt-Table Testing Periprocedural Care Tilt-Table Testing Technique Tilt-Table Testing Medication 1839773-overview Nov 20, 2014 2015-06-06-00:31 0 Clinical Procedures 2002 Procedures Procedure 
       1 2 content 1839773 503 2 ssg 
     Jun 04, 2015 
       procedure Procedures 
       clinical_procedures Clinical Procedures 
       clinical_procedures_physical Examination Protocols tilt-table testing, tilt table testing, tilt table, tilt-table test, syncope, autonomic nervous system dysfunction, neurological disorders, tilt testing The tilt-table test is a simple, noninvasive, and informative test first described in 1986 as a diagnostic tool for patients with syncope of unknown origin. It is usually performed in hospital electrophysiology departments with the endpoint of reproducing syncope and subsequent appropriate therapy. 0 Tilt-Table Testing 
     Overview 
       Background 
         The tilt-table test is a simple, noninvasive, and informative test first described in 1986 as a diagnostic tool for patients with syncope of unknown origin. [ The causes of syncope have been divided into 6 major categories, as listed below. [ echocardiography [ 
           The 6 major categories of syncopal etiologies [ 
           Neurological disorders 
           
             Vertebrobasilar transient ischemic attacks 
             
               Subclavian steal syndrome 
             
               Normal pressure hydrocephalus 
             Seizure disorders 
           Metabolic disorders 
           
             Hypoxia 
             Hyperventilation 
             
               Hypoglycemia 
           Mechanical heart disease 
           
             
               Aortic stenosis 
             
               Mitral stenosis 
             Global ischemia 
             Aortic dissection 
             Pulmonic dissection 
             Obstructive cardiomyopathy 
             Left atrial myxoma 
             Prosthetic valve dysfunction 
             Pulmonary embolus 
             Pulmonary hypertension 
           Cardiac arrhythmias/brady arrhythmias/tachyarrhythmias 
           
             Bradycardia/pauses 
             Sinus node dysfunction 
             AV conduction disease 
           Psychiatric disorders 
           
             Panic attacks 
             Hysteria 
           Autonomic Nervous System Dysfunction 
           
             Primary and secondary dysautonomias 
             Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS) 
             Postural orthostatic hypotension 
             Vasodepressor or vasovagal syncope 
       Indications 
         Consider tilt-table testing in patients with signs or symptoms suggestive of orthostatic hypotension, vasodepressor or vasovagal syncope, postural orthostatic tachycardia, or when other causes of syncope have been eliminated. In general, consider tilt-table testing for patients with the following issues:  
           
             Hypotension (unexplained) 
             Tachycardia when standing 
             Pallor when upright 
             Orthostatic palpitations 
             Dizziness (unexplained) 
             Lightheadedness 
             History of frequent unexplained falls 
             History of episodes of fainting or loss of consciousness The ACC expert consensus document for tilt-table testing including indications was first published in 1996. [ [ 
           Table 1. European Society of Cardiology 2009 Indications for Tilt-Table Testing [ 
             
               
                 
                   Recommendations  
                 
                   Class  
                 
                   level  
               
                 Tilt table is indicated in the case of an unexplained single syncopal episode in high-risk settings (eg, occurrence of, or potential risk of physical injury or with occupational implications)or recurrent episodes in the absence of organic heart disease, after cardiac causes of syncope have been excluded  
                 I 
                 B 
               
                 Tilt testing is indicated when it is of clinical value to demonstrate susceptibility to reflex syncope to the patient 
                 I 
                 C 
               
                 Tilt testing should be considered to discriminate between reflex and orthostatic hypotensive syncope 
                 IIa 
                 C 
               
                 Tilt testing may be considered for differentiating syncope with jerking movement from epilepsy 
                 IIb 
                 C 
               
                 Tilt testing may be indicated for evaluating patients with recurrent unexplained falls 
                 IIb 
                 C 
               
                 Tilt testing may be indicated for evaluating patients with frequent syncope and psychiatric disease 
                 IIb 
                 C 
               
                 Tilt testing is not recommended for assessment of treatment 
                 III 
                 B 
               
                 Isoproterenol tilt testing is contraindicated in patients with ischemic heart disease 
                 III 
                 C 
       Contraindications 
         Contraindications to tilt-table testing include the following: [ 
           
             Coma 
             Feeble patient unable to stand 
             Lower extremity fractures 
             Severe anemia 
             Recent stroke (within seven days) 
             Recent myocardial infarction 
             Severe proximal cerebral or coronary arterial disease 
             Critical mitral or aortic stenosis 
             Left ventricular outflow tract obstruction 
             Hypotensive shock 
             Tachyarrhythmias 
             Severe metabolic acidosis 
             Electrolyte imbalance 
             End-stage renal failure 
             Severe heart failure 
       Technical Considerations 
         Complication Prevention Avoid invasive intra-arterial blood pressure monitoring during tilt-table testing because catheterization may provoke a vasovagal reaction. Use a manual sphygmomanometer or digital plethysmography. [ 
       Outcomes 
         Generally tilt-table testing is safe, but complications may occur related to decreased perfusion of the heart, including the following:  
           
             Electrocardiographic changes of transient myocardial ischemia with or without angina. 
             Vasospasm with isoproterenol administration. [ 
             Occasionally, cardiac arrhythmias result in termination of the test, such as advanced atrioventricular block (second or third degree), severe bradycardia or pauses, atrial fibrillation, or tachyarrhythmias.  Complications may also occur related to decreased perfusion of the brain, including the following  : 
           
             Seizures from prolonged hypotension (this is a transient phenomenon and not indicative of a seizure disorder) 
             Rarely, transient ischemic attacks or strokes occur. 
             Transient mental confusion can occur. 
             Patients may also experience nonspecific symptoms such as nausea or anxiety. 
     Periprocedural Care 
       Patient Education & Consent 
         Discuss the test findings with both the patient and a companion to increase proper understanding of the results. 
         Patient Instructions To avoid dehydration on the day of the study in patients who have been NPO after midnight, or receiving diuretic therapy, infuse 250 mL of 0.9% saline prior to tilt testing. Administer IV saline cautiously in patients with heart failure or renal failure.  Hold all medications the night before the procedure and in the morning to increase the sensitivity of the study. However, if diuretic or antihypertensive medications are a suspected etiology of syncopal episodes, allow the patient to take medications as usual the morning of the procedure.  
       Equipment 
         Equipment/personnel should be as follows: [ 
           
             Tilt table 
             Blood pressure monitor 
             Heart rate monitor 
             ECG rhythm monitor 
             Oxygen saturation monitor 
             Crash cart with defibrillator available 
             Infusion pumps 
             Quiet, air conditioned room 
             Soft background music (optional) 
             Direct physician supervision and nurse or trained technician assistance 
       Patient Preparation 
         Anesthesia Anesthesia is not to be used for this procedure. The patient must remain alert and awake to detect the moment of unconsciousness. 
         Positioning See the Technique section. 
       Monitoring & Follow-up 
         Discharge patient to home if blood pressure and heart rate are back to baseline and patient is not symptomatic. Advise patient not to drive for 2 hours after the procedure. 
     Technique 
       Approach Considerations 
         The tilt-table test involves placing a patient on a flat table with a foot support, then tilting the table upward for a period of time to observe changes in blood pressure and heart rate. The patient is initially positioned supine and horizontal on the table, then tilted by degrees to a completely vertical, upright position. During the study, blood pressure, heart rate, oxygen saturation, and cardiac rhythms are recorded and monitored for the end point of fainting, which indicates a positive tilt-test result. [ 
       Tilt-Table Testing 
         The following steps describe positioning and technique in tilt-table testing: [ 
           
             Dress patient in hospital gown without restrictive binding around abdomen or legs. 
             Insert an intravenous catheter and start a maintenance IV fluid drip with 0.9% NaCl. 
             Place patient supine on tilt table and secure patient with protective straps to avoid falls. 
             Apply blood pressure, heart rate, oxygen saturation, and rhythm monitors and record baseline measurements. 
             Have the patient rest supine for 10 minutes. 
             Provide a room that is quiet, dim, and a comfortable temperature. 
             Raise tilt table up to 80°. 
             Record blood pressure, heart rate, and oxygen saturations every minute. 
             Tilt table upright for 20-45 minutes depending on protocol. 
             Record rhythm changes on ECG strip. 
             Decide if pharmacologic provocation with nitroglycerine after 5 minutes of tilt or isoproterenol after 20 minutes of tilt is needed to provoke a response.  
             Record any symptoms or signs observed. 
             Terminate tilt if systolic blood pressure falls below 70 mmHg, even if symptoms are not present. 
             Terminate tilt if patient faints, and return patient to supine position. 
             Place patient in reverse Trendelenburg position if blood pressure does not normalize. 
             Administer a 250-mL bolus of 0.9% NaCl for hypotension. 
             Record blood pressure and heart rate until back to baseline. 
             Disconnect patient and allow patient to sit in chair for 5 minutes. 
       Test Results 
         If provocative pharmaceuticals such as isoproterenol or nitroglycerine are used, differentiate the expected pharmacological effects of the drug from an abnormal response.  If avoidance of pharmacologic testing is desired, such as in a patient with ischemic heart disease, proceed with an upright tilt for 45 minutes. If a fainting response does not occur, the test is negative.  A positive tilt-table test result may be described as mixed, cardio inhibitory, or vasodepressor (see Overview). [ 
         Classification of positive responses to tilt testing One particular problem with tilt-table testing is the plethora of protocols with differing sensitivity, which can make reproduction of results unreliable. The reliability and accuracy of tilt-table studies is improved when combined with hemodynamic and volume measurements. [ [ [ 
           Table 1. Classification of Positive Responses to Tilt Testing [ 
             
               
                 
                   Type 1 - 
                   Mixed 
                 Heart rate falls at the time of syncope, but the ventricular rate does not fall to less than 40 beats/min -1 -1 
               
                 
                   Type 2 - 
                   Cardioinhibitory 
                 A) Cardioinhibition without asystole: heart rate falls to a ventricular rate less than 40 beats/min -1 B) Cardioinhibition with asystole: Asystole occurs for more than 3 s. Blood pressure falls with or occur before the heart rate fall.  
               
                 
                   Type 3 - 
                   Vasodepressor 
                 Heart rate does not fall more than 10% from its peak at the time of syncope. 
               
                   
                 Exception 1. Chronotropic incompetence: No heart rate rise during the tilt testing (ie, less than 10% from the pre-tilt rate). 
               
                   
                 Exception 2. Excessive heart rate rise: An excessive heart rate both at the onset of the position and throughout its duration before syncope (ie, greater than 130 beats/min -1 
       Definitions of Key Terms 
         Dysautonomias, primary Deficiency of mechanisms that increase α- and β- adrenergic tone as a result of baroreceptor stimulation to compensate for a decrease of venous blood return to the heart  
         HUT Abbreviation for head-up tilt test 
         Neurally mediated hypotension Reduction in systolic blood pressure 25 mmHg from baseline supine values, sustained for at least 1 minute, with no associated increase in heart rate, and accompanied by symptoms of presyncope  
         Neurocardiogenic syncope Acute hypotension with or without bradycardia 
         Orthostatic (postural) hypotension Greater than 20-30 mmHg drop in systolic blood pressure plus a greater than 10 mmHg drop in diastolic blood pressure: Orthostatic hypotension is a common cause of a temporary loss of consciousness or feelings of lightheadedness, which results from changing body position from a supine or sitting position to a more vertical or upright position. Normally, blood tends to pool in the lower extremities due to gravity whenever a person stands up, potentially reducing the amount of blood available to return to the heart or brain.  The sympathetic nervous system regulates blood vessel tone by modulating nerve traffic to lower extremity blood vessels. The arterial and venous circulations compensate for pooling by constricting; thus redirecting blood flow from the leg veins back toward the heart. However, poor sympathetic tone to the lower extremity blood vessels can cause the mechanisms of arterial and venous constriction to fail, resulting in a disproportionate pooling of blood in the legs, instead of returning blood to the circulation, resulting in less oxygen supplied to the brain and heart. As a result, a person feels lightheaded and may even faint.  
         Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS) The occurrence of orthostatic symptoms in association with either a 30 beats/ minute increase in heart rate from baseline within 10 minutes of being tilted upright, sustained for 1 minute or more, or a heart rate of higher than 120 beats/ minute in the same period  
         Presyncope The presence of premonitory symptoms and signs of imminent syncope such as severe weakness, lightheadedness, nausea, or diaphoresis 
         Syncope Pan-cerebral hypoperfusion accompanied by a lack of postural tone and unconsciousness without focal neurological deficit  
         Vasodepressor syncope Abrupt drop in blood pressure with symptoms 
         Vasovagal syncope Abrupt drop in blood pressure and heart rate with symptoms: The hallmark of vasovagal syncope is the occurrence of one to several symptoms either before, during, and immediately after a brief loss of consciousness. Symptoms are varied, and may include nausea, flushing, headache, vertigo, palpitations, and asthenia. [ 
       Web Links 
         See the list below: 
           
             Brignole M. An Update on the Treatment of Vasovagal Syncope.  HJC http://www.hellenicjcardiol.com/archive/full_text/2004/3/2004_3_132.pdf 
             
               National Dysautonomia Research Foundation 
     Medication 
       Medication Summary The goals of pharmacotherapy are to reduce morbidity and prevent complications. 
       Vasodilators 
         Class Summary Vasodilators decrease preload and/or afterload. 
         Nitroglycerin sublingual (Nitrostat) This agent causes relaxation of vascular smooth muscle by stimulating intracellular cyclic GMP; the result is a decrease in blood pressure. Dosage forms include SL, TD, and IV preparations. The distinction between short-acting preparations for treatment of acute attacks and long-acting preparations for prevention of recurrent episodes is important. Administration of 300-400 µg of sublingual nitroglycerine) in order to increase average heart rate by approximately 20-25% over baseline to trigger abnormal responses in susceptible patients after a tilt stabilization phase of 5 minutes. [ 
       Beta1/Beta2 Adrenergic Agonists 
         Class Summary When given systemically, isoproterenol stimulates beta receptors in the heart, which produces positive inotropic and chronotropic effects. This results in increased cardiac output.  
         Isoproterenol (Isuprel) Isoproterenol has sympathomimetic effects; specifically, beta1- and beta2-adrenergic receptor agonist activity. Intravenous medication used in incremental doses (usually 3 µg/min) in order to increase average heart rate by approximately 20-25% over baseline to trigger abnormal responses in susceptible patients after a tilt stabilization phase of 20 minutes. [ 
       Isotonic Crystalloids 
         Class Summary Isotonic sodium chloride (normal saline [NS]) is a standard crystalloid intravenous (IV) fluid used for initial volume resuscitation. It expands the intravascular and interstitial fluid spaces. Typically, about 30% of administered isotonic fluid stays intravascular; therefore, large quantities may be required to maintain adequate circulating volume.  
         Normal saline (NS, 0.9% NaCl) NS restores interstitial and intravascular volume. Administer a 250-mL bolus of 0.9% NaCl for hypotension. 
     start media 
       
         Patient undergoing upright tilt-table testing.  Patient undergoing upright tilt-table testing.  
       
         Tilt-table test.  Tilt-table test.  
     
       Author 
         James V Talano, MD, MBA MM, FACC, FAHA, Director of Cardiovascular Medicine, SWICFT Institute James V Talano, MD, MBA is a member of the following medical societies:  American College of Cardiology Heart Failure Society of America Society of Geriatric Cardiology American Society of Nuclear Cardiology American College of Chest Physicians American Association for Physician Leadership American College of Physicians American Heart Association American Society of Echocardiography Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Coauthor(s) 
         Janet K Sparker, MS, PA-C Assistant Professor, Southwest Florida Physician Assistant Program, Nova Southeastern University; Physician Assistant, Certified, Private Cardiology Practice of James V Talano, MD, Southwest Institute of Cardiovascular Fitness and Testing Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Chief Editor 
         Karlheinz Peter, MD, PhD Professor of Medicine, Monash University; Head of Centre of Thrombosis and Myocardial Infarction, Head of Division of Atherothrombosis and Vascular Biology, Associate Director, Baker Heart Research Institute; Interventional Cardiologist, The Alfred Hospital, Australia Karlheinz Peter, MD, PhD is a member of the following medical societies:  American Heart Association German Cardiac Society Cardiac Society of Australia and New Zealand Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
     Acknowledgements 
       
         Acknowledgments The authors gratefully acknowledge the contributions of Dr Fredrick Jaeger, Director, Cardiac Arrhythmia Monitoring Lab, Medical Director, Syncope Center, Cleveland Clinic to the development and writing of this article.  
     
       Moya A. Tilt testing and neurally mediated syncope: too many protocols for one condition or specific protocols for different situations?.  Eur Heart J [Medline] 
       Fogoros R. 2nd Ed.  Electrophysiologic testing 
       Moya A, Sutton R, et al. Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of syncope (version 2009): the Task Force for the Diagnosis and Management of Syncope of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC).  Eur Heart J [Medline] 
       Benditt DG, Ferguson DW, Grubb BP, Kapoor WN, Kugler J, Lerman BB. Tilt table testing for assessing syncope. American College of Cardiology.  J Am Coll Cardiol [Medline] 
       Goldman L, Braunwald E.  Primary cardiology 
       Leman RB, Clarke E, Gillette P. Significant complications can occur with ischemic heart disease and tilt table testing.  Pacing Clin Electrophysiol [Medline] 
       Parry SW, Reeve P, Lawson J, Shaw FE, Davison J, Norton M. The Newcastle protocols 2008: an update on head-up tilt table testing and the management of vasovagal syncope and related disorders.  Heart [Medline] 
       Strickberger SA, Benson DW, Biaggioni I, Callans DJ, Cohen MI, Ellenbogen KA. AHA/ACCF scientific statement on the evaluation of syncope: from the American Heart Association Councils on Clinical Cardiology, Cardiovascular Nursing, Cardiovascular Disease in the Young, and Stroke, and the Quality of Care and Outcomes Research Interdisciplinary Working Group; and the American College of Cardiology Foundation In Collaboration With the Heart Rhythm Society.  J Am Coll Cardiol [Medline] 
       Barón-Esquivias G, Martínez-Rubio A. Tilt table test: state of the art.  Indian Pacing Electrophysiol J [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Fouad-Tarazi F, Calcatti J, Christian R, Armstrong R, Depaul M. Blood volume measurement as a tool in diagnosing syncope.  Am J Med Sci [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Guida P, Iacoviello M, Forleo C, Ferrara A, Sorrentino S, Balducci C. Prevalence, timing, and haemodynamic correlates of prodromes in patients with vasovagal syncope induced by head-up tilt test.  Europace [Medline] 
       Brignole M. An Update on the Treatment of Vasovagal Syncope.  HJC [Full Text]

Article 6:

   
     Brain Anatomy 
       Brain Anatomy: Overview, Gross Anatomy: Cerebrum, Gross Anatomy: Cortex 
       Brain Anatomy: Overview, Gross Anatomy: Cerebrum, Gross Anatomy: Cortex 
       Overview Overview Gross Anatomy: Cerebrum Gross Anatomy: Cortex Gross Anatomy: Brainstem and Cranial Nerves Gross Anatomy: Cerebellum Gross Anatomy: Meninges Gross Anatomy: Ventricles and Cerebrospinal Fluid Gross Anatomy: Blood Vessels Microscopic Anatomy Functional Neuroanatomy 
       Brain Anatomy Overview 1898830-overview Feb 24, 2015 2015-06-05-22:13 1 Anatomy 2002 Anatomy Anatomy 
       1 2 content 1898830 504 25 ssg 
     Jun 04, 2015 
       anatomy Anatomy 
       anatomy Anatomy 
       anatomy_anatomy Anatomy brain anatomy, brain images, cerebral anatomy, central nervous system anatomy, brain, anatomy The central nervous system consists of the brain and the spinal cord. The peripheral nervous system consists of the extensions of neural structures beyond the central nervous system and includes somatic and autonomic divisions. 0 Brain Anatomy 
     Overview 
       The central nervous system consists of the brain and the spinal cord. The peripheral nervous system consists of the extensions of neural structures beyond the central nervous system and includes somatic and autonomic divisions. The brain is composed of 3 main structural divisions: the cerebrum, the brainstem, and the cerebellum (see the images below). At the base of the brain is the brainstem, which extends from the upper cervical spinal cord to the diencephalon of the cerebrum. The brainstem is divided into the medulla, pons, and midbrain. Posterior to the brainstem lies the cerebellum. 
         Brain, coronal view.  Brain, coronal view.  
         Brain, inferior view.  Brain, inferior view.  
         Brain, lateral view.  Brain, lateral view.  
         Brain, midsagittal view.  Brain, midsagittal view.  
     Gross Anatomy: Cerebrum 
       The cerebrum is the largest component of the brain. It is divided into right and left hemispheres. The corpus callosum is the collection of white matter fibers that joins these hemispheres.  Each of the cerebral hemispheres is further divided into 4 lobes: the frontal lobe, the parietal lobe, the temporal lobe, and the occipital lobe. The medial temporal lobe structures are considered by some to be part of the so-called limbic lobe.  Briefly, the frontal lobe is distinguished from the parietal lobe posteriorly by the central sulcus (see the image below). The frontal lobe and parietal lobes are divided inferiorly from the temporal lobe by the lateral sulcus. The parietal lobe is distinguished from the occipital lobe by the parieto-occipital sulcus on the medial surface. 
         Lateral and medial surfaces of cerebrum, showing major sulci and gyri.  Lateral and medial surfaces of cerebrum, showing major sulci and gyri.  The cerebrum is further divided into the telencephalon and diencephalon. The telencephalon consists of the cortex, the subcortical fibers, and the basal nuclei. The diencephalon mainly consists of the thalamus and hypothalamus. The telencephalon of the cerebrum is disproportionately well-developed in humans as compared with other mammals.  
       Cortex and subcortical fibers The outermost layer of the cerebrum is the cortex, which has a slightly gray appearance--hence the term "gray matter." The cortex has a folded structure; each fold is termed a gyrus, while each groove between the folds is termed a sulcus. Cortical anatomy is discussed in greater detail below.  Below the cortex are axons, which are long fibers that emanate from and connect neurons. Axons are insulated by myelin, which increases the speed of conduction. Myelin is what gives the white appearance to these fibers of the brain--hence the term "white matter."  
         Limbic system The limbic system is a grouping of cortical and subcortical structures involved in memory formation and emotional responses. The limbic system allows for complex interactions between the cortex, the thalamus, the hypothalamus, and the brainstem. The limbic system is not defined by strict anatomic boundaries but incorporates several important structures. The limbic structures conventionally include the amygdala, the hippocampus, the fornix, the mammillary bodies, the cingulate gyrus, and the parahippocampal gyrus.  The functional connections within the limbic system are best summarized by the Papez circuit. From the hippocampus, signals are relayed via the fornix to the mammillary bodies and via the mammillothalamic tract to the anterior nucleus of the thalamus. The thalamocingulate radiation then projects to the cingulate gyrus and back to the hippocampus to complete the circuit. The hippocampus serves as a primary output structure of the limbic system.  Unlike the 6-layered neocortex, the hippocampus only has 3 layers and is termed the archicortex. The hippocampus is felt to be a structure that is crucial to formation of memory--more specifically, a type of memory called declarative or explicit memory. Declarative memory is essentially the ability to recall life events of the past such as what meal was eaten for breakfast or where the car is parked.  Over time, however, certain declarative memories from the distant past can be independently recalled without the hippocampal structures. The hippocampus likely allows long-term memory encoding in the cortex and allows short-term memory retrieval. In laboratory studies of animals and humans, the hippocampus has been shown to also have a cellular memory termed "long-term potentiation."  The amygdala is a collection of nuclei that lies within the uncus. It receives multiple modes of sensory information as inputs. The outputs from the amygdala travel through the stria terminalis and the ventral amygdalofugal pathway. Output structures include the hypothalamus, as well as the thalamus, hippocampus, brainstem, and cortex. The amygdala appears to be involved in mediating the emotional aspects of memory, especially the subjective aspects of fear responses.  
       Basal nuclei (ganglia) The basal nuclei (formerly referred to as the basal ganglia) comprise the caudate nucleus, putamen, globus pallidus, subthalamic nucleus, and substantia nigra. Pairs of these structures bear different names. The putamen and globus pallidus combined form the lentiform nuclei. The putamen and caudate nucleus combined form the striatum. The striatum derives its name from the striped appearance given by the gray matter connections bridging across the internal capsule. The basal nuclei are closely integrated with the motor cortex, premotor cortex, and motor nuclei of the thalamus and plays a crucial role in modulation of movements.  The primary input to the basal nuclei is from the primary motor cortex and premotor cortex (Brodmann areas 4 and 6) and consists primarily of the pyramidal cells in cortical layer V. These excitatory projections lead primarily to the striatum. The striatum also receives input from the dopaminergic cells of the substantia nigra. In turn, the striatum sends inhibitory projections to the globus pallidus externa and interna. The globus pallidus externa sends inhibitory projections to the subthalamic nucleus, which sends excitatory projections to the globus pallidus interna. The globus pallidus interna in turn projects to the ventral anterior and ventral lateral nuclei of the thalamus.  Certain movement disorders can be traced to pathologies in the basal nuclei, the most notable being  Parkinson disease Huntington disease 
       Thalamus Positioned between the brainstem and the telencephalon, the diencephalon is composed of the thalamus, the epithalamus, the subthalamus, and the hypothalamus. The thalamus serves as a relay station for ascending input to the cortex and receives information from each of the cardinal senses (except smell). It is hypothesized that the thalamus serves a gating function in filtering information. The thalamus consists of multiple nuclei that are briefly described here (see the image below). 
         Major nuclei of thalamus.  Major nuclei of thalamus.  Left and right sides of the thalamus are divided by the third ventricle. Each side is then divided by the internal medullary lamina into a series of anterior nuclei, ventrolateral nuclei, and medial nuclei. Smaller nuclei are found within these regions, numbering perhaps in excess of 100.  The anterior thalamic nuclei are functionally associated with the limbic system and share reciprocal connections with the cingulate gyrus and the mammillary bodies. The medial nuclei project to the frontal association cortex and premotor cortex, with reciprocal connectivity.  The ventrolateral nuclei can be further divided into the ventral anterior (VA), ventral lateral (VL), ventral posterolateral (VPL), and ventral posteromedial (VPM) nuclei. The VA and VL nuclei share input from the globus pallidus and projections to the motor cortex. The VPL and VPM serve as sensory relays in the body and face, respectively.  The lateral nuclei are divided into lateral dorsal and lateral posterior nuclei, with projections to the cingulate gyrus and parietal cortex, respectively.  Other thalamic structures not included in the anatomic divisions above include the medial and lateral geniculate bodies, which process auditory and visual information, respectively. The pulvinar connects reciprocally with the parietal and occipital association cortex. Intralaminar nuclei within the internal medullary lamina obtain input from the brainstem, cerebellum, and other thalamic nuclei and project to basal nuclei structures and other thalamic nuclei. Amongst the intralaminar nuclei, the centromedian nucleus is a part of the reticular activating system, which plays a role in maintaining cortical arousal.  
       Epithalamus The epithalamus is made up of the habenula, the habenular commissure, the posterior commissure, and the pineal gland.  
       Subthalamus Located between the midbrain and the thalamus, the subthalamus contains the subthalamic nucleus, the red nucleus, and the substantia nigra. Subthalamic structures are closely integrated with the basal nuclei and play a role in modulation of movement.  
       Hypothalamus Thy hypothalamic nuclei lie in the walls of the third ventricle anteriorly. The hypothalamus is involved in mediating endocrine, autonomic, visceral, and homeostatic functions. It can roughly be divided into anterior, posterior, and middle groups of nuclei.  The anterior nuclei include the preoptic, the supraoptic, and paraventricular nuclei. The posterior nuclei include the supramammillary nucleus, the mammillary nucleus, the intercalate nucleus, and the posterior nucleus. The middle nuclei include the infundibular, tuberal, dorsomedial, ventromedial, and lateral nuclei.  Parasympathetic control can be attributed to the anterior and medial nuclear groups, whereas sympathetic control can be attributed to the posterior and lateral nuclear groups. Satiety can be localized to stimulation of medial nuclei, and hunger can be localized to stimulation of lateral nuclei. Other functions of the hypothalamus include regulation of body temperature, heart rate, blood pressure, and water balance.  The hypothalamus has close connections with the cingulate gyrus, frontal lobe, hippocampus, thalamus, brainstem, spinal cord, basal nuclei, and pituitary gland.  
     Gross Anatomy: Cortex 
       The neocortex is the most phylogenetically developed structure of the human brain as compared with the brains of other species. The complex pattern of folding allows an increased cortical surface to occupy a smaller cranial volume. The pattern of folding that forms the sulcal and gyral patterns remains highly preserved across individuals. This enables a nomenclature for the cortical anatomy.  The left and right cerebral hemispheres are separated by the longitudinal cerebral fissure. The principal connection between the 2 hemispheres is the corpus callosum. Each cortical hemisphere can be divided into 4 lobes: frontal, temporal, parietal, and occipital. The frontal lobe can be distinguished from the temporal lobe by the lateral sulcus (Sylvian fissure). The frontal lobe can be distinguished from the parietal lobe by the central sulcus (Rolandic fissure). The parieto-occipital sulcus, which is visible on the medial aspect of the hemisphere, divides the parietal and occipital lobes. Within the lateral sulcus is another cortical surface referred to as the insula.  The frontal lobe can then be further divided into the superior, middle, and inferior frontal gyri, which are divided by the superior and inferior frontal sulci, respectively. The inferior frontal gyrus forms the frontal operculum, which overlies the lateral sulcus. The frontal operculum can be divided into 3 triangular gyri: the pars orbitalis, the pars triangularis, and the pars opercularis, in order from anterior to posterior. The precentral gyrus is the gyrus immediately anterior to the central sulcus.  Similarly, the temporal lobe is divided into the superior, middle, and inferior temporal gyri, which are separated by the superior and inferior temporal sulci. On the inferior surface of the temporal lobe just lateral to the midbrain the parahippocampal gyrus can be identified, with the collateral sulcus lying lateral. Between the parahippocampal gyrus and the inferior temporal gyrus lies the occipitotemporal gyrus, also known as the fusiform gyrus.  Within the parietal lobe, the superior temporal sulcus is capped by the angular gyrus. Just above this, the lateral sulcus is capped by the supramarginal gyrus. Just below the angular gyrus, the lateral occipital gyrus caps the inferior temporal sulcus.  
     Gross Anatomy: Brainstem and Cranial Nerves 
       Evolutionarily, the brainstem is the most ancient part of the brain. Structurally, it can be divided into the medulla oblongata, pons, and midbrain. These three structures are briefly described below. Cross-sectional anatomy of the brainstem is rather complex, given the multiple traversing pathways and cranial nerve nuclei (see the image below). [ 
         Three views of brainstem.  Three views of brainstem.  
       Medulla oblongata The medulla oblongata, or simply medulla, is continuous with and superior to the cervical spinal cord. There are several external anatomic features of the medulla that can be visible grossly. Ventrally, the pyramids and pyramidal decussation is visualized just below the pons. These are the descending corticospinal tracts. Just lateral to the pyramids, the rootlets of the hypoglossal nerve can be seen as they exit the brainstem. Lateral to the rootlets of the hypoglossal nerve is the inferior olive. Dorsolateral to the inferior olive, the rootlets of the 9th and 10th cranial nerves (glossopharyngeal and vagus) exit. Dorsally, 2 pairs of protrusions are visible, which are the gracile tubercles medially and the cuneate tubercles just lateral to those. These represent the nuclei where sensory information from the dorsal columns is relayed onto thalamic projection neurons. Just superior to these protrusions is the floor of the fourth ventricle, which bears several characteristic impressions. The vagal trigone is the dorsal nucleus of the vagus nerve (cranial nerve X) and lies inferiorly, just below the hypoglossal trigone.  
       Pons Superior to the medulla lies the pons, the ventral surface of which has a characteristic band of horizontal fibers. These fibers are the pontocerebellar fibers that are in turn projections from the corticopontine fibers. They cross to enter the contralateral middle cerebellar peduncle and thus enter the cerebellum.  On either side of the midline, there are bulges that are produced by the descending corticospinal tracts. At the pontomedullary junction, the 6th cranial nerve (abducens) can be seen exiting the brainstem. Laterally, but anterior to the middle cerebellar peduncle, the fifth cranial nerve (trigeminal) is seen exiting the brainstem. Below the middle cerebellar peduncle, the seventh and eighth cranial nerves (facial and vestibulocochlear) can be seen exiting. Dorsally, the pons forms the floor of the fourth ventricle.  
       Midbrain The midbrain, also termed the mesencephalon, is the superiormost aspect of the brainstem. Ventrally, the midbrain appears as 2 bundles that diverge rostrally as the cerebral peduncles. Between the cerebral peduncles, the third cranial nerve (oculomotor) can be seen exiting. The fourth cranial nerve (trochlear) exits dorsally and is unique in this regard. It then courses anteriorly against the cerebral peduncles.  The posterior aspect of the midbrain has 2 pairs of characteristic protrusions, the superior and inferior colliculi. The superior colliculi are involved in mediating the vestibulo-ocular reflex, whereas the inferior colliculi are involved in sound localization.  
       Cranial nerves There are 12 pairs of cranial nerves that function mainly to convey motor signals to and sensory information from the head and neck. The lower cranial nerves have somewhat more complex visceral functions that are not strictly limited to the head and neck. The cranial nerves are as follows: 
         
           I: The  olfactory nerve 
           II: The optic nerve relays visual information from the retina; the right and left optic nerves then join at the optic chiasm, where they give rise to the optic tracts, which convey visual information to the thalamus and brainstem and, ultimately, the visual cortex;  optic gliomas 
           III: The oculomotor nerve is principally involved in the control of  eye movements 
           IV: The trochlear nerve innervates the superior oblique muscle and is purely a motor nerve 
           V: The  trigeminal nerve 1 2 3 trigeminal neuralgia 
           VI: The abducens nerve innervates the lateral rectus nerve, allowing lateral eye movements 
           VII: The  facial nerve Bell's palsy 
           VIII: The vestibulocochlear nerve is a purely sensory nerve that conveys auditory information from the cochlea to the brainstem via the cochlear branch; the  vestibular 
           IX: The glossopharyngeal nerve is involved in taste and salivation, as well as sensation in the oropharynx; the afferent limb of the gag reflex is mediated by the glossopharyngeal nerve  
           X: The  vagus nerve 
           XI: The accessory nerve has contributions from a spinal component and innervates neck muscles involved in head turning 
           XII: The hypoglossal nerve is a motor nerve that innervates muscles of the tongue 
     Gross Anatomy: Cerebellum 
       The cerebellum occupies the posterior fossa, dorsal to the pons and medulla. It is involved primarily in modulating motor control to enable precisely coordinated body movements. Similar to the cerebrum, which has gyri and sulci, the cerebellum has finer folia and fissures that increase the surface area. The cerebellum consists of 2 hemispheres, connected by a midline structure called the vermis. In contrast to the neocortex of the cerebrum, the cerebellar cortex has 3 layers: molecular, Purkinje, and granular. There are 4 deep cerebellar nuclei: the fastigial, globose, emboliform, and dentate nuclei, in sequence from medial to lateral. The afferent and efferent pathways to and from the cerebellum exist within the 3 cerebellar peduncles. 
         Top and anterior views of cerebellum.  Top and anterior views of cerebellum.  In children, the cerebellum is a common location for tumors such as juvenile pilocytic astrocytomas and  medulloblastomas hemangioblastomas Chiari I 
     Gross Anatomy: Meninges 
       The meninges consist of 3 tissue layers that cover the brain and spinal cord: the pia, arachnoid, and the dura mater (see the image below). The pia along with the arachnoid are referred to as the leptomeninges, whereas the dura is referred to as the pachymeninx. 
         Cross-sectional view of meninges and dural venous sinus.  Cross-sectional view of meninges and dural venous sinus.  The innermost of the 3 layers is the pia mater, which tightly covers the brain itself, conforming to its grooves and folds. This layer is rich with  blood vessels Outside the pia mater, which tightly contours the brain, is the arachnoid mater. The arachnoid mater is a thin weblike layer. Between the pia mater and the arachnoid mater is a space called the subarachnoid space, which contains cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). This space is where the major arteries supplying blood to the brain lie. If a blood vessel ruptures in this space, it can cause a  subarachnoid hemorrhage meningiomas The outermost meningeal layer is the dura mater, which lines the interior of the skull. The dura mater is composed of 2 individual layers, the meningeal dura and the periosteal dura. For the most part, these layers are fused; venous sinuses can be found in areas of separation. The tentorium cerebelli is a dura mater fold that separates the cerebellum from the cerebrum. The falx cerebri is a fold that separates the left and right cerebral hemispheres. Between the arachnoid mater and the dura mater is the subdural space. If bleeding occurs in the space underneath the dura mater, it is called a  subdural hematoma epidural hematoma 
     Gross Anatomy: Ventricles and Cerebrospinal Fluid 
       The brain is bathed in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), which is continuously produced and absorbed. The ventricles are CSF-containing cavities within the brain. The structures that produce CSF are contained within the ventricles and are called the choroid plexuses. CSF is produced at a rate of about 450 mL/day, although at any given time about 150 mL can be found within the CSF spaces. Thus, the volume of CSF in most adults is turned over about 3 times per day. The brain has 4 ventricles (see the image below). Within the cerebral hemispheres are the lateral ventricles, which are connected to each other and to the third ventricle through a pathway called the interventricular foramen (of Monro). The third ventricle lies in the midline, separating deeper brain structures such as the left and right thalami. The third ventricle communicates with the fourth ventricle through the cerebral aqueduct (of Sylvius), which is a long narrow tube. 
         Ventricular system, which circulates cerebrospinal fluid through brain.  Ventricular system, which circulates cerebrospinal fluid through brain.  From the fourth ventricle, CSF flows into the subarachnoid space around both the brain and the spinal cord. From the subarachnoid space, CSF is then absorbed into the venous system. Arachnoid granulations or villi are structures projecting into the superior sagittal sinus that release CSF back into the venous system. Hydrocephalus 
     Gross Anatomy: Blood Vessels 
       Arteries supply blood to the brain via 2 main pairs of vessels: the internal carotid artery and the vertebral artery on each side. The internal carotid artery on each side terminates into the anterior cerebral artery, the middle cerebral artery, and the posterior communicating artery. The vertebral arteries on each side join to form the basilar artery. The basilar artery then gives rise to the posterior cerebral arteries and the superior cerebellar arteries. The basilar artery, the posterior cerebral arteries, the posterior communicating arteries, and the anterior cerebral arteries, along with the anterior communication artery, form an important collateral circulation at the base of the brain termed the cerebral arterial  circle (of Willis) cerebral aneurysms Venous return to the heart occurs through a combination of deep cerebral veins and superficial cortical veins. The veins then contribute to larger venous sinuses, which lie within the dura and ultimately drain through the internal jugular veins to the brachiocephalic veins and then into the superior vena cava. 
     Microscopic Anatomy 
       The cellular structure of the brain is composed primarily of neurons and their support cells, which are broadly termed glial cells. The 3 principal types of glial cells are astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, and microglia. These glial cells can give rise to glial tumors, such as  astrocytomas oligodendrogliomas glioblastomas When examined histologically, the neurons of the cortical gray matter demonstrate a laminar pattern. The neocortex contains 6 distinct layers, in contrast to the evolutionarily older paleocortex and archicortex, which typically contain 3 layers. The specific cytoarchitectural patterns of the cortex are not uniform throughout the cerebral cortex, and their variation was mapped by the German physician Korbinian Brodmann and presented in 1909. The so-called Brodmann areas represent cytoarchitectural differences across different brain regions, and the numbering scheme developed by Brodmann is still used to refer to distinct areas of the cortex. [ 
       Layers of neocortex See the list below: 
         
           I: The molecular layer is the outermost layer of the cortex, which lies adjacent to the pial surface 
           II: The external granular layer is a dense layer of primarily inhibitory granule cells; this layer serves mainly to establish intracortical connections  
           III: The external pyramidal layer contains smaller neurons than its deeper counterpart; this layer provides projections to association fibers and commissural fibers.  
           IV: The internal granular layer is the principal input layer of the cortex, with input derived largely from the thalamus 
           V: The internal pyramidal layer is typically the largest layer within the cortex, containing large pyramidal cells; it is one of the principal output layers of the cortex, projecting to subcortical and spinal pathways; in the motor cortex, cells of this layer are termed Betz cells  
           VI: The fusiform layer contains cells that form association and projection fibers 
       White matter White matter tracts connect both nearby and distal brain structures and can be distinguished according to the types of connections they mediate. Projection fibers connect structures over the longest distances, such as the corticospinal projections from the motor cortex to the anterior horn cells of the spinal cord. Association fibers connect structures within the same hemisphere, such as the arcuate fasciculus, which connects the temporoparietal receptive speech areas with the frontal speech areas. Commissural fibers connect homologous structures in the left and right hemispheres, the most notable example being the corpus callosum. Diffusion tensor imaging 
       Glial cells The glial cells provide supportive and regulatory functions for neurons, and in fact glial cells outnumber neurons. Three principal types of glial cells exist: microglia, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes. Microglia have a function in the brain similar to that of the immune system. Astrocytes play a role in creating the blood-brain barrier, which allows certain substances to selectively pass from the capillary system. They are also responsible for reactive scar formation in the brain. Oligodendrocytes form myelin, which serves to electrically insulate the axons of nerve cells, allowing increased rates of conduction. Abnormal proliferation of oligodendrocytes and astrocytes can lead to primary brain tumors called  oligodendrogliomas astrocytomas glioblastoma multiforme 
     Functional Neuroanatomy 
       Our current understanding of functional localization in the cortex (see the image below) is derived from several sources, which include insights from patients with lesions involving specific areas of the cortex, awake mapping of the cortex during brain surgery, and functional imaging studies such as functional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and positron emission tomography (PET) in healthy volunteers. 
         Functional localization within cerebral cortex.  Functional localization within cerebral cortex.  Some of the earliest contributions to modern language mapping can be traced to the work of neurologist Paul Broca, who studied the language deficits in patients with stroke. Broca's area, as it is termed, is a region of the frontal operculum, which also overlaps with Brodmann area 44 and 45. Three overlapping names describe this region, which is responsible for speech production. Selective damage to this region leads to difficulty speaking but typically with preserved comprehension. In contrast, Wernicke's area refers to the posterior aspect of the superior temporal gyrus, which overlaps with Brodmann area 22. This region is generally responsible for speech comprehension, and selective injury to it can lead to impaired understanding with preserved speech production. Additionally, language function is hemispherically dominant. This means that  Broca's and Wernicke's aphasia The primary motor and sensory cortex have been mapped extensively through intraoperative stimulation in awake patients. Early work performed by neurosurgeon Wilder Penfield in Montreal led to the conceptualization of the homunculus, which is the somatotopic representation of the body in both the primary motor and primary sensory cortex (see the image below). 
         Homunculus is somatotopic representation of human body in primary motor and sensory cortex. Some... Homunculus is somatotopic representation of human body in primary motor and sensory cortex. Some body parts are disproportionately represented because there are more motor and sensory fibers devoted to regions such as face and fingers.  The primary motor cortex corresponds with the precentral gyrus, or Brodmann area 4. Intraoperative stimulation of the motor cortex in awake patients leads to contralateral muscle contraction in a single muscle or discrete group of muscles. The premotor cortex, which corresponds to Brodmann area 6, is also occupied with movement, but typically more complex movements are elicited by stimulation here. The primary sensory cortex corresponds with the postcentral gyrus, or Brodmann areas 1-3. The homunculus obtained from awake mapping corresponds to that of the motor cortex. Stimulation in awake patients during surgery typically leads to the subjective sensation of tingling of the corresponding body part on the opposite side of the body. Caudally, the superior parietal lobule, Brodmann areas 5 and 7, represents the secondary sensory cortex, which is felt to subserve multimodal sensory information. The primary visual cortex corresponds to Brodmann area 17 and occupies the occipital pole. It is also termed the striate cortex. The visual cortex is retinotopically organized. Surrounding the primary visual cortex is the visual association cortex, or Brodmann areas 18 and 19. The primary auditory cortex lies on the superior bank of the superior temporal gyrus and corresponds to Brodmann area 41. Like the primary motor, primary sensory, and visual cortices, the primary auditory cortex is tonotopically organized. The auditory association cortex, or Brodmann area 42, surrounds the primary auditory cortex. 
     start media 
       
         Brain, coronal view.  Brain, coronal view.  
       
         Brain, inferior view.  Brain, inferior view.  
       
         Brain, lateral view.  Brain, lateral view.  
       
         Brain, midsagittal view.  Brain, midsagittal view.  
       
         Three views of brainstem.  Three views of brainstem.  
       
         Top and anterior views of cerebellum.  Top and anterior views of cerebellum.  
       
         Major nuclei of thalamus.  Major nuclei of thalamus.  
       
         Lateral and medial surfaces of cerebrum, showing major sulci and gyri.  Lateral and medial surfaces of cerebrum, showing major sulci and gyri.  
       
         Homunculus is somatotopic representation of human body in primary motor and sensory cortex. Some... Homunculus is somatotopic representation of human body in primary motor and sensory cortex. Some body parts are disproportionately represented because there are more motor and sensory fibers devoted to regions such as face and fingers.  
       
         Inferior surface of cerebrum, showing major sulci and gyri.  Inferior surface of cerebrum, showing major sulci and gyri.  
       
         Functional localization within cerebral cortex.  Functional localization within cerebral cortex.  
       
         Cross-sectional view of meninges and dural venous sinus.  Cross-sectional view of meninges and dural venous sinus.  
       
         Ventricular system, which circulates cerebrospinal fluid through brain.  Ventricular system, which circulates cerebrospinal fluid through brain.  
     
       Author 
         Anand I Rughani, MD Neurosurgeon, Epilepsy and Functional Neurosurgery, Maine Medical Center Anand I Rughani, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American Association of Neurological Surgeons American Medical Association Congress of Neurological Surgeons Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Coauthor(s) 
         Paul L Penar, MD, FACS Professor, Department of Surgery, Division of Neurosurgery, Director, Functional Neurosurgery and Radiosurgery Programs, University of Vermont College of Medicine Paul L Penar, MD, FACS is a member of the following medical societies:  Alpha Omega Alpha American Association of Neurological Surgeons World Society for Stereotactic and Functional Neurosurgery Congress of Neurological Surgeons Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Chief Editor 
         Thomas R Gest, PhD Professor of Anatomy, Department of Medical Education, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, Paul L Foster School of Medicine Disclosure: Received royalty from Lippincott Williams & Wilkins for other. 
     
       Baehr M, Frotscher M.  Duus' Topical Diagnosis in Neurology 
       Nolte J.  The Human Brain 
       DeArmond SJ, Fusco MM, Dewey MM.  Structure of the Human Brain 
       Loukas M, Pennell C, Groat C, Tubbs S, Cohen-Gadol AA. Korbinian Brodmann (1868-1918) and His Contributions to Mapping the Cerebral Cortex.  Neurosurgery 
       Crossman AR, Neary D.  Neuroanatomy 
       Carpenter MB.  Core Text of Neuroanatomy 
       Waxman SG.  Clinical Neuroanatomy

Article 7:

   
     Auditory System Anatomy 
       Auditory System Anatomy: Overview, Cochlear Nerve and Central Auditory Pathways, Neurophysiologic Considerations 
       Auditory System Anatomy: Overview, Cochlear Nerve and Central Auditory Pathways, Neurophysiologic Considerations 
       Overview Overview Cochlear Nerve and Central Auditory Pathways Neurophysiologic Considerations Clinical Applications 
       Auditory System Anatomy Overview 1948643-overview Aug 17, 2015 2015-08-17-11:39 1 Anatomy 2002 Anatomy Anatomy 
       1 2 content 1948643 504 25 ssg 
     Aug 17, 2015 
       anatomy Anatomy 
       anatomy Anatomy 
       anatomy_anatomy Anatomy anatomy of the auditory system, auditory system anatomy, auditory system, acoustic pathway, spiral organ of Corti, auditory pathway, eighth cranial nerve, cranial nerve VIII, vestibulocochlear nerve, 8th cranial nerve, clinical anatomy This article discusses the anatomy of the auditory pathway (see the following images), as well as a few physiologic considerations and clinical applications.{file12616}{file12617}{file12626}The eighth cranial nerve (CN VIII) or vestibulocochlear nerve is composed of 2 different sets of fibers: (1) the cochlear nerve and (2) the vestibular nerve. 0 Auditory System Anatomy 
     Overview 
       This article discusses the anatomy of the auditory pathway (see the following images), as well as a few physiologic considerations and clinical applications. 
         Illustration of the auditory reflex pathway.  Illustration of the auditory reflex pathway.  
         Illustration of the conscious auditory pathway.  Illustration of the conscious auditory pathway.  
         Anatomy of the auditory system. Courtesy of Hamid R Djalilian, MD.  The eighth cranial nerve (CN VIII) or vestibulocochlear nerve is composed of 2 different sets of fibers: (1) the cochlear nerve and (2) the vestibular nerve. These 2 nerves are anatomically and physiologically different. The peripheral segments of the cochlear and vestibular nerves join at the lateral part of the internal auditory canal (IAC) to form the vestibulocochlear nerve. They are also joined by the facial nerve in the IAC. [ 
     Cochlear Nerve and Central Auditory Pathways 
       Embryology Embryologically, the vestibulocochlear (acousticovestibular) ganglion initially develops fused with the VIIth nerve (facial) ganglion. Separation of the 3 components occurs gradually. The vestibular and cochlear (acoustic) ganglia neuroblasts are derived almost exclusively from the otocyst epithelium, in contrast to other cranial sensory ganglia in which both ganglionic and neural crest placodes make extensive contributions to the neuroblast populations. However, supporting Schwann and satellite cells, as in all cranial ganglia, are entirely of neural crest origin, apparently arising from the ganglion of the facial nerve (see the image below). [ 
         Illustration showing that almost all neurons in the vestibular and acoustic ganglia are derived... Illustration showing that almost all neurons in the vestibular and acoustic ganglia are derived from the otocyst as placodal neurons. In contrast, all the supporting and Schwann cells are derived from neural crest cells, possibly from the VIIth nerve ganglion to which the vestibulocochlear ganglion is initially attached.  
       Ascending (afferent or projective) pathways of the auditory nerve The ascending pathway transmits impulses from the spiral organ (of Corti) to the cerebral cortex (see the following image). 
         Illustration of the afferent auditory reflex pathway.  Illustration of the afferent auditory reflex pathway.  
         First-order neurons of the auditory system The fibers of the cochlear nerve originate from an aggregation of nerve cell bodies in the spiral ganglion, located in the modiolus of the cochlea. The neurons of the spiral ganglion are the first of 4 order neurons between the cochlea and the cerebrum. They are bipolar cells, because they have 2 sets of processes, or fibers, that extend from opposite ends of the cell bodies. The longer central fibers, also called the primary auditory fibers, form the cochlear nerve, and the shorter, peripheral fibers extend to the bases of the inner and outer hair cells. They extend radially from the spiral ganglion to the habenula perforata, a series of tiny holes beneath the inner hair cells. At this point, they become demyelinated to enter the spiral organ (of Corti). Only about 30,000 of these fibers exist, and the greater number of them—about 95%—innervate the inner hair cells. The remainder cross the tunnel of Corti to innervate the outer hair cells. The longer central processes of the bipolar cochlear neurons unite to form the cochlear nerve trunk. These primary auditory fibers exit the modiolus through the internal meatus and enter the medulla oblongata. The "mouth" of the internal auditory canal (IAC) is called the porus acusticus. The anatomic relationship of the VIIth and VIIIth nerves in the IAC and the cerebellopontine angle region are important anatomic areas related to skull base surgery and neuro-otologists. The VIIth and VIIIth nerves are encased in glial tissue throughout their intracranial course. These nerves are surrounded by Schwann cells beginning in the IAC close to the porus acusticus. The Obersteiner-Redlich zone is the glial-Schwann junction. The Scarpa (vestibular) ganglion lies approximately in the middle of the IAC. The division of cranial nerve (CN) VIII into the cochlear and vestibular branches may occur in the medial segment of the IAC or in the subarachnoid space. The posterior half of the IAC is occupied by the superior and inferior branches of the vestibular nerve. The cochlear nerve is located anteroinferiorly in the canal. The VIIth nerve is located in the anterosuperior portion of the IAC. A vertical crest (Bill bar) separates the facial and superior vestibular nerves in the upper part of the IAC. The transverse crest separates this upper portion of the IAC from the lower part containing the lower vestibular and cochlear divisions. The cerebellopontine angle is a potential space in the posterior cranial fossa. Its boundaries are as follows: 
         
           Anteriorly: Posterior fossa of the temporal bone 
           Posteriorly: Anterior surface of the cerebellum 
           Medially: Inferior olive 
           Superiorly: Inferior border of the pons and cerebellar peduncle 
           Inferiorly: The cerebellar tonsil The  trigeminal nerve After entering the medulla, the cochlear nerve fibers proceed to the cochlear nucleus. The cochlear nucleus consists of 5 distinct cell types, each with distinct morphologic and physiologic features, such as response to stimulus onset, stimulus offset, and frequency modulation. The cochlear nucleus is divided into the dorsal and ventral parts. The cochlear fibers divide into 2 main bundles: One group passes lateral and dorsal to the restiform body; the other group remains slightly ventral and medial to the restiform body and terminates in the ventral cochlear nucleus. Fibers coming from the basal coils of the cochlea have been found to terminate in the in the dorsal part of the dorsal cochlear nucleus. The fibers from the apical parts of the cochlea end in the ventral part of the dorsal cochlear nucleus and the ventral nucleus. However, some fibers pass to higher order neurons further along the pathway before they synapse. 
         Second-, third-, and fourth-order neurons of the auditory system The cell bodies of the second order neurons lie in the dorsal and ventral cochlear nuclei. Some fibers from the ventral cochlear nucleus pass across the midline to the cells of the superior olivary complex, whereas others make connection with the olivary cells of the same side. The superior olivary complex is considered the first center in the ascending auditory system, where inputs from both ears converge. Together, these fibers form the trapezoid body (where the third order neurons are located). Fibers from the dorsal cochlear nucleus cross the midline to end on the cells of the nuclei of the lateral lemniscus. There they are joined by the fibers from the ventral cochlear nuclei of both sides and from the olivary complex. Auditory nuclei above the superior olivary complex can be excitatory or inhibitory with inputs from each ear. The lemniscus is a major tract, most of the fibers of which end in the inferior colliculus, the auditory center of the midbrain. The inferior colliculus is a complex nucleus with at least 18 major cell types and at least 5 areas of specialization. It is involved in all areas of auditory behavior, including differential sensitivity for frequency and intensity, loudness, and binaural hearing. Although some fibers may bypass the colliculus and end, together with the fibers from the colliculus, at the next higher level, the medial geniculate body of the thalamus is where the fourth order neurons are located. From the medial geniculate body, there is an orderly projection of fibers to a portion of the cortex of the temporal lobe. 
         Auditory input The primary auditory cortex is the first region of the cerebral cortex to receive auditory input. In humans and other primates, the primary acoustic area in the cerebral cortex is the superior transverse temporal gyri of Heschl, a ridge in the temporal lobe, on the lower lip of the deep cleft between the temporal and parietal lobes, known as the lateral sulcus (Sylvian fissure). Because about half of the fibers of the auditory pathways cross the midline whereas others ascend on the same side of the brain, each ear is represented in both the right and left cortex. For this reason, even when the auditory cortical area of one side is injured by trauma or stroke, binaural hearing may be minimally affected. Perception of sound is associated with the right posterior superior temporal gyrus (STG). The superior temporal gyrus contains several important structures of the brain, including Brodmann 41 and 42, marking the location of the primary auditory cortex, the cortical region responsible for the sensation of basic characteristics of sound such as pitch and rhythm. The auditory association area is located within the temporal lobe of the brain, in an area called the Wernicke area or area 22. This area, near the lateral cerebral sulcus, is an important region for the processing of acoustic signals so that they can be distinguished as speech, music, or noise. As is common for thalamocortical connections, nuclei within the medial geniculate body that send fibers to the auditory cortex also receive fibers from the same area of the cortex. Impaired hearing due to bilateral cortical injury involving both auditory areas has been reported, but it is extremely rare. However, bilateral lesions of the temporal lube have been shown to produce wide-ranging effects (cortical deafness, in which several behaviors are affected, including speech discrimination, localization of sound, and the detection of faint, short-duration signals). The following image depict the conscious and reflex afferent auditory pathways. 
         Illustration of the conscious auditory pathway.  Illustration of the conscious auditory pathway.  
         Illustration of the auditory reflex pathway.  Illustration of the auditory reflex pathway.  
       Descending pathways of the auditory nerve Besides the conscious and reflex afferent auditory pathways, descending efferent pathways also exist. Efferent projections from the brain to the cochlea also play a role in the perception of sound. In general, the descending pathways have an inhibiting effect upon the ascending fibers, and they tend to provide self-regulation to the auditory system. Each relay auditory station is considered to be dually innervated, thus providing a way for incoming impulses to be internally influenced, modified, or negated. Parallel with the pathway ascending from the cochlear nuclei to the cortex is a pathway descending from the cortex to the cochlear nuclei. In both pathways, some of the fibers remain on the same side, whereas others cross the midline to the opposite side of the brain. Evidence of a "spur" line ascending from the dorsal cochlear nucleus to the cerebellum and another descending from the inferior colliculus to the cerebellum also exist. The significance of these cerebral connections is not clear, but they may antedate the evolutionary development of the cerebral cortex. From the superior olivary complex, a region in the medulla oblongata, a fiber tract called the olivocochlear bundle also originates (see the image below). It constitutes an efferent system, or feedback loop, by which nerve impulses, thought to be inhibitory, reach the hair cells. 
         Illustration of the descending pathways of the auditory nerve. The crosses represent small... Illustration of the descending pathways of the auditory nerve. The crosses represent small olivocochlear bundle (OCB) neurons; the triangles represent large OCB neurons. DMP, DMPO = dorsal medial preolivary nucleus; IHC = inner hair cell; LSO = lateral superior olivary nucleus; MNTB = medial nucleus of trapezoid body; MSO = medial superior olivary nucleus; OHC = outer hair cell; VNTB = ventral nucleus of trapezoid body.  
       Microscopic anatomy See  Inner Ear [ 
         Spiral organ (of Corti).  Spiral organ (of Corti).  
         Scanning electron micrograph of the upper surface of the organ of Corti after removal of the... Scanning electron micrograph of the upper surface of the organ of Corti after removal of the tectorial membrane. There are 3 rows of outer hair cells with their characteristic V-arranged stereocilia. A single row of inner hair cells with a slightly curved row of stereocilia is also shown.  
         The cochlea's afferent innervation pattern. The illustration is shown through the vestibular (... The cochlea's afferent innervation pattern. The illustration is shown through the vestibular (Reissner's) membrane, looking "down" on the spiral organ (of Corti). The principal fiber bundles are 1 and 2; 2a and 3a are internal spiral fibers; 4 are external spiral fibers; 5 and 6 are radial fibers innervating the inner hair cells.  
     Neurophysiologic Considerations 
       The complex chain of nerve cells in the auditory system helps to process and relay auditory information, encoded in the form of nerve impulses, directly to the highest cerebral levels in the cortex of the brain. To some extent, different properties of the auditory stimulus are conveyed along distinct parallel pathways. This method of transmission, employed by other sensory systems, provides a way for the central nervous system (CNS) to analyze different properties of the single auditory stimulus, with some information processed at low levels and other information at higher levels. At lower levels of the pathway, information as to pitch, loudness, and localization of sounds is processed, and appropriate responses, such as the contraction of the intra-aural muscles, turning of the eyes and head, or movements of the body as a whole, are initiated. [ The patterns of spatial representations of the spiral organ (of Corti) at the lower levels of the auditory pathway seem to be in accord with the place theory of the cochlear analysis of sound. Physiologic evidence of tuning of the auditory system has also been obtained by recording the electrical potentials from individual neurons at various levels. Most neurons of the auditory pathway show a "best frequency," that is, a frequency to which the individual neuron responds at minimal intensity (see the image below). 
         Cross-section of the cochlear nucleus showing the track made by the electrode penetration and... Cross-section of the cochlear nucleus showing the track made by the electrode penetration and the characteristic frequencies of the neurones within the anteroventral (AVCN), dorsal nucleus (DN), and posteroventral nucleus (PVCN). The spacial separation of frequencies and the tonotropic organization is maintained throughout the central auditory pathway.  This finding is entirely compatible with experimental evidence of frequency tuning of the hair cells. With each increase in the intensity of the sound, the neuron is able to respond to a wider band of frequencies, thus reflecting the broad tuning of the basilar membrane. Increased intensity of stimulation causes a more rapid rate of responding. The pitch of a sound tends to be coded in terms of which neurons are responding, and its loudness is determined by the rate of response and the total number of neurons activated. 
       Sound localization and discrimination The localization of sounds from a stationary source in the horizontal plane is known to depend on the recognition of minute differences in the intensity and time of arrival of the sound at the 2 ears. A sound that arrives at the left ear a few microseconds sooner than it does at the right or that sounds a few decibels louder in that ear is recognized as coming from the left. In a real-life situation, the head may also be turned to pinpoint the sound by facing it and thus canceling these differences. For low-frequency tones, a difference in phase at the 2 ears is the criterion for localization, but for higher frequencies, the difference in loudness caused by the sound shadow of the head becomes all-important. Such comparisons and discriminations appear to be carried out at the brainstem and midbrain levels of the central auditory pathway. The spectral shapes of sounds have been shown to be most important for determining the elevation of a source that is not in the horizontal plane. Localization of sound that emanates from a moving source is a more complicated task for the nervous system and apparently involves the cerebral cortex and short-term memory. Injury to the auditory area of the cortex on one side of the brain interferes with the localization of a moving sound source on the opposite side of the body. Experimental studies have indicated that the cortex is not even necessary for frequency recognition, which can be carried out at lower levels, but that it is essential for the recognition of temporal patterns of sound. Therefore, the cortex appears to be reserved for the analysis of more complex auditory stimuli, such as speech and music, for which the temporal sequence of sounds is equally important. Presumably, it is also at the cortical level that the meaning of sounds is interpreted and behavior is adjusted in accordance with their significance. Such functions were formerly attributed to an "auditory association area" immediately surrounding the primary area, but they probably should be thought of as involving much more of the cerebral cortex, thanks to the multiple, parallel interconnections between the various areas. Each cochlear nucleus receives impulses only from the ear of the same side. A comparison between the responses of the 2 ears first becomes possible at the superior olivary complex, which receives fibers from both cochlear nuclei. Some neurons of the accessory nucleus of the olivary complex respond to impulses from both ears. Others respond to impulses from one side only, but their response is modified by the simultaneous arrival of impulses from the other side. The auditory system appears to be capable of making the minute fine discriminations of time and intensity that are necessary for localization of sound. By virtue of such bilateral neural interconnections in the brain, the 2 ears together can be much more effective than 1 ear alone in picking out a particular sound in the presence of a background of noise. They also permit attention to be directed to a single source of sound. This is one aspect of the "cocktail party effect," whereby a listener with normal hearing can attend to different conversations in turn or concentrate on one speaker despite the surrounding babble. The observation that most of the significantly activated areas were the same with monaural or binaural stimulation suggests that the differences in auditory perception with binaural stimulation are not due to the involvement of significantly different centers but, more likely, to the type of information that reaches these centers for processing. Furthermore, the degree of stimulation may be less intense in binaural than in monaural stimulation. This supports the concept that a richer binaural auditory stimulation compared with monaural stimulation does not mean summation of stimuli but integration and better processing of the information. Whether the muscles within the ear play a part in filtering out unwanted sounds during such selective listening has not been established. The less-favorable aspect of the "cocktail party effect" is that such background noises mask dialogue, which can make following a conversation difficult for persons with sensorineural impairment. Efferent projections from the brain to the cochlea also play a role in the perception of sound. Efferent synapses occur on outer hair cells and on afferent dendrites under inner hair cells. 
     Clinical Applications 
       A few clinical applications related to the auditory pathway are addressed in this section. 
       Auditory brainstem response The most obvious application on the study of the auditory central nervous system (CNS) involves the interpretation of auditory evoked potentials (AEPs). The auditory brainstem response (ABR), which was first reported in 1967, is a component of these potentials. ABR is a series of 7 waves occurring within 10-15 milliseconds after the onset of an acoustic stimulus. The waves test the function of the auditory nerve and auditory pathways in the brainstem. Each wave is generated as follows (in normal subjects) [ 
         
           Waves I and II: VIIIth nerve 
           Wave III: Cochlear nucleus 
           Wave IV: Superior olive/lateral lemniscus 
           Wave V: Lateral lemniscus/inferior colliculus The following are 3 main uses of ABR: 
         
           Threshold testing of infants, young children, and malingerers 
           Diagnosis of acoustic neuromas 
           Diagnosis of brainstem lesions and neuropathies There are 2 other uses of ABR that are gaining popularity: (1) screening of babies in the intensive care unit (ICU) who are at risk for hearing loss, and (2) intraoperative monitoring during surgery such as VIIIth nerve vascular decompression and vestibular nerve section. 
       Otoacoustic emissions Techniques for measuring efferent effects using otoacoustic emissions (OAEs) are now well developed and have promise in clinical applications ranging from predicting which patients are susceptible to acoustic trauma to characterizing relationships between efferent activation and learning disabilities. 
       Efferent auditory pathways Efferent auditory pathways modulate the outer hair cells of the cochlea, protect against noise, and improve the detection of sound sources in noisy environments. In a prospective clinical, quantitative, cross-sectional, contemporary study, Fronza et al concluded that, in young, normal-hearing adults who experience efferent auditory pathways dysfunctions (such as  tinnitus [ 
       Developmental and learning impairments Neuroscience research on auditory processing pathways and their behavioral and electrophysiologic correlates has provided important clinical applications. Deviations and disruptions in auditory pathways in children and adolescents result in a well-documented range of developmental and learning impairments frequently referred for neuropsychologic evaluation. 
       Auditory deprivation, enhancement, and training Until recently, researchers used behavioral measures of identification and discrimination of speech and nonspeech stimuli to assess the effects of auditory deprivation, enhancement, and training. Recent advances to measure electrical activity in the auditory system in response to sound have made it possible to study how changes in auditory input (hearing loss, auditory input modification, or training) affect the function of the central auditory system. The evidence of changes in the auditory cortex in mature animals and in humans with acquired sensorineural hearing loss as well as changes associated with auditory training in persons with normal hearing has been reported. The results of a study that measures psychoacoustic and speech-recognition performance of persons with hearing loss, with and without  hearing aids 
       Cochlear implants Both  cochlear implants 
         
           Having severe to profound sensorineural loss in both ears 
           Having a functioning auditory nerve 
           Having lived at least a short time period without hearing (approximately 70+ decibel hearing loss, on average) 
           Having good speech, language, and communication skills, or, in the case of infants and young children, having a family willing to work toward speech and language skills with therapy 
           Not benefitting enough from other kinds of hearing aids 
           Having no medical reason to avoid surgery 
           Living in or desiring to live in the "hearing world" 
           Having realistic expectations about results 
           Having the support of family and friends 
           Having appropriate services set up for postcochlear implant aural rehabilitation (through a speech language pathologist, deaf educator, or auditory verbal therapist) Cochlear nerve deficiency (CND) is increasingly diagnosed in children with sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL). Clemmens et al (2013) used magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to study the prevalence of CND and the correlations with audiologic phenotype in children with unilateral SNHL. [ Yan et al (2013) also found that hypoplastic cochlear nerve canal might be more indicative of CND than that of a narrow internal auditory canal. [ Ryugo found that the auditory brain is highly malleable by experience. [ 
       Auditory brainstem implant An ABI is an implant like a cochlear implant, except that it bypasses the cochlea altogether and attaches its electrode directly to the brainstem. ABIs provide sound information by direct stimulation of the cochlear nucleus to patients with dysfunctional or absent cranial nerve VIII. Most of the recipients of ABIs have reported being able to hear sounds that can help them lip read, but most are not able to discriminate speech from these sounds alone. Candidates for this implant are carefully chosen. The surgery is much more invasive than the surgery required for a cochlear implants, and it is usually undertaken only in situations in which the patient is (or has become) completely deaf. However, in contrast to patients with cochlear implants, the use of ABIs is less successful. This cannot be fully explained by the different location of stimulation but rather to a nonspecific neuronal stimulation. Many candidates for the ABI trials are patients with neurofibromatosis II (NF2) who are having their second tumor removed. Directly comparing cochlear implants and ABIs is somewhat difficult, because both types of implants are constantly being updated. In general, however, it has been shown that the ABI, particularly the more recent multichannel ABI, provides levels of sound detection and discrimination that are similar to those provided by the original single-channel cochlear implant. Mandala et al found that the definition of the potential threshold and the number of auditory and extra-auditory waves generated was significantly improved by using electrical compound action potentials during auditory brainstem implantation. [ 
     start media 
       
         Illustration of the auditory reflex pathway.  Illustration of the auditory reflex pathway.  
       
         Illustration of the conscious auditory pathway.  Illustration of the conscious auditory pathway.  
       
         Illustration showing that almost all neurons in the vestibular and acoustic ganglia are derived... Illustration showing that almost all neurons in the vestibular and acoustic ganglia are derived from the otocyst as placodal neurons. In contrast, all the supporting and Schwann cells are derived from neural crest cells, possibly from the VIIth nerve ganglion to which the vestibulocochlear ganglion is initially attached.  
       
         Illustration of the afferent auditory reflex pathway.  Illustration of the afferent auditory reflex pathway.  
       
         Illustration of the descending pathways of the auditory nerve. The crosses represent small... Illustration of the descending pathways of the auditory nerve. The crosses represent small olivocochlear bundle (OCB) neurons; the triangles represent large OCB neurons. DMP, DMPO = dorsal medial preolivary nucleus; IHC = inner hair cell; LSO = lateral superior olivary nucleus; MNTB = medial nucleus of trapezoid body; MSO = medial superior olivary nucleus; OHC = outer hair cell; VNTB = ventral nucleus of trapezoid body.  
       
         Spiral organ (of Corti).  Spiral organ (of Corti).  
       
         Scanning electron micrograph of the upper surface of the organ of Corti after removal of the... Scanning electron micrograph of the upper surface of the organ of Corti after removal of the tectorial membrane. There are 3 rows of outer hair cells with their characteristic V-arranged stereocilia. A single row of inner hair cells with a slightly curved row of stereocilia is also shown.  
       
         The cochlea's afferent innervation pattern. The illustration is shown through the vestibular (... The cochlea's afferent innervation pattern. The illustration is shown through the vestibular (Reissner's) membrane, looking "down" on the spiral organ (of Corti). The principal fiber bundles are 1 and 2; 2a and 3a are internal spiral fibers; 4 are external spiral fibers; 5 and 6 are radial fibers innervating the inner hair cells.  
       
         Cross-section of the cochlear nucleus showing the track made by the electrode penetration and... Cross-section of the cochlear nucleus showing the track made by the electrode penetration and the characteristic frequencies of the neurones within the anteroventral (AVCN), dorsal nucleus (DN), and posteroventral nucleus (PVCN). The spacial separation of frequencies and the tonotropic organization is maintained throughout the central auditory pathway.  
       
         Normal brainstem responses to broad-band click. Latency increases as click intensity decreases.  Normal brainstem responses to broad-band click. Latency increases as click intensity decreases.  
       
         Anatomy of the auditory system. Courtesy of Hamid R Djalilian, MD.  
     
       Author 
         Ted L Tewfik, MD Professor of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Professor of Pediatric Surgery, McGill University Faculty of Medicine; Senior Staff, Montreal Children's Hospital, Montreal General Hospital, and Royal Victoria Hospital Ted L Tewfik, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American Society of Pediatric Otolaryngology Canadian Society of Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Chief Editor 
         Thomas R Gest, PhD Professor of Anatomy, Department of Medical Education, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, Paul L Foster School of Medicine Disclosure: Received royalty from Lippincott Williams & Wilkins for other. 
     Acknowledgements 
       Medscape Reference thanks Hamid R Djalilian, MD, Associate Professor of Otolaryngology, Director of Neurotology and Skull Base Surgery, University of California Irvine Medical Center, for assistance with the video contribution to this article.  
     
       Benoudiba F, Toulgoat F, Sarrazin JL. The vestibulocochlear nerve (VIII).  Diagn Interv Imaging [Medline] 
       Nakamichi R,  Yamazaki M,  Ikeda M,  Isoda H,  Kawai H,  Sone M, et al. Establishing Normal Diameter Range of the Cochlear and Facial Nerves with 3D-CISS at 3T.  Magn Reson Med Sci [Medline] 
       Kandel ER, Schwartz JH, Jessell TM.  Principles of Neuroscience 
       Johnston MC. Developmental biology of the ear. Tewfik TL, Der Kaloustian VM, eds.  Congenital Anomalies of the Ear, Nose, and Throat 
       Josey AF, Glasscock ME 3rd, Musiek FE. Correlation of ABR and medical imaging in patients with cerebellopontine angle tumors.  Am J Otol [Medline] 
       Ferguson MA, Smith PA, Lutman ME, Mason SM, Coles RR, Gibbin KP. Efficiency of tests used to screen for cerebello-pontine angle tumours: a prospective study.  Br J Audiol [Medline] 
       Lonsbury-Martin BL, Martin GK, Coats AC. Chapter 47: The physiology of the auditory and vestibular systems. Ballenger JJ, ed.  Diseases of the Nose, Throat, Ear, Head and Neck 
       Sooy CD, Boles R. Neuroanatomy for the otolaryngologist--head neck surgeon. Paparella MM, Shunrick DA, Gluckman JL, Meyerhoff WL, eds.  Otolaryngology 
       Colletti V, Shannon RV, Carner M, Veronese S, Colletti L. Complications in auditory brainstem implant surgery in adults and children.  Otol Neurotol [Medline] 
       Kemp DT. Otoacoustic emissions, their origin in cochlear function, and use.  Br Med Bull [Medline] 
       Mills JH, Khariwala SS, Weber PC. Chapter 129: Anatomy and physiology of hearing. Bailey BJ, Johnson JT, Newlands SD, eds.  Head & Neck Surgery: Otolarygology 
       Guinan JJ Jr. Cochlear efferent innervation and function.  Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg [Medline] 
       Bailey T. Auditory pathways and processes: implications for neuropsychological assessment and diagnosis of children and adolescents.  Child Neuropsychol [Medline] 
       Fronza AB, Barreto DC, Tochetto TM, da Cruz IB, da Silveira AF. [Association between auditory pathway efferent functions and genotoxicity in young adults] [Portugese].  Braz J Otorhinolaryngol [Medline] 
       Neuman AC. Central auditory system plasticity and aural rehabilitation of adults.  J Rehabil Res Dev [Medline] 
       Goycoolea M, Mena I, Neubauer S. Is there a difference in activation or in inhibition of cortical auditory centers depending on the ear that is stimulated?.  Acta Otolaryngol [Medline] 
       Offeciers E, Morera C, Müller J, Huarte A, Shallop J, Cavallé L. International consensus on bilateral cochlear implants and bimodal stimulation.  Acta Otolaryngol [Medline] 
       Godar SP, Litovsky RY. Experience with bilateral cochlear implants improves sound localization acuity in children.  Otol Neurotol [Medline] 
       Litovsky RY, Johnstone PM, Godar SP. Benefits of bilateral cochlear implants and/or hearing aids in children.  Int J Audiol [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Strydom T, Hanekom JJ. The performance of different synthesis signals in acoustic models of cochlear implants.  J Acoust Soc Am [Medline] 
       Jamróz B, Lachowska M, Niemczyk K, Morawski K, Bartoszewicz R, Pierchala K. [Possibility of hearing preservation treatment by patient suffered from neurofibromatosis type 2: case report].  Otolaryngol Pol [Medline] 
       Gudwani S, Munjal SK, Panda NK, Verma RK. Correlation of tinnitus loudness and onset duration with audiological profile indicating variation in prognosis.  ISRN Otolaryngol [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Clemmens CS,  Guidi J,  Caroff A,  Cohn SJ,  Brant JA,  Laury AM, et al. Unilateral Cochlear Nerve Deficiency in Children.  Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg [Medline] 
       Yan F, Li J, Xian J, Wang Z, Mo L. The cochlear nerve canal and internal auditory canal in children with normal cochlea but cochlear nerve deficiency.  Acta Radiol [Medline] 
       Ryugo D. Auditory neuroplasticity, hearing loss and cochlear implants.  Cell Tissue Res [Medline] 
       Mandalà M, Colletti L, Colletti G, Colletti V. Improved outcomes in auditory brainstem implantation with the use of near-field electrical compound action potentials.  Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg [Medline] 
       Brackmann DE, Crawford JV, Douglas Green J. Chapter 149: Cerebellopontine angle tumors. Bailey BJ, Johnson JT, Newlands SD, eds.  Head & Neck Surgery: Otolarygology

Article 8:

   
     Bariatric Surgery 
       Bariatric Surgery: Background, History of the Procedure, Problem Bariatric Surgery Workup: Laboratory Studies, Imaging Studies, Diagnostic Procedures Bariatric Surgery Treatment & Management: Medical Therapy, Surgical Therapy, Preoperative Details 
       Bariatric Surgery: Background, History of the Procedure, Problem Bariatric Surgery Workup: Laboratory Studies, Imaging Studies, Diagnostic Procedures Bariatric Surgery Treatment & Management: Medical Therapy, Surgical Therapy, Preoperative Details 
       Overview
 Background History of the Procedure Problem Epidemiology Etiology Pathophysiology Presentation Indications Contraindications Workup
 Laboratory Studies Imaging Studies Diagnostic Procedures Treatment
 Medical Therapy Surgical Therapy Preoperative Details Intraoperative Details Postoperative Details Follow-up Complications Outcome and Prognosis Future and Controversies 
       Bariatric Surgery Overview Bariatric Surgery Workup Bariatric Surgery Treatment 197081-overview Feb 10, 2015 2015-08-04-23:57 0 Clinical Procedures 2002 Procedures Procedure 
       1 2 content 197081 503 3032278 20 diet1 
     Jun 04, 2015 
       procedure Procedures 
       clinical_procedures Clinical Procedures 
       clinical_procedures_gastro Gastrointestinal bariatric surgery, gastric bypass, stomach, obesity, gastric, bariatric, weight loss surgery, weight surgery, stomach surgery, gastric banding, gastrectomy, Roux-en-Y, gastric sleeve, gastric bypass surgery, body mass index, BMI, laparoscopic gastric bypass, duodenal switch, gastric bypass complications, adjustable gastric banding, Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, sleeve gastrectomy, biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch Obesity is a major health problem worldwide and has reached an epidemic proportion in the Western society. Evidence continues to accumulate that obesity is a major risk factor for many diseases and is associated with significant morbidity and mortality. 0 Bariatric Surgery 
     Overview 
       Background 
         Obesity is a major health problem worldwide and has reached an epidemic proportion in the Western society. Evidence continues to accumulate that obesity is a major risk factor for many diseases and is associated with significant morbidity and mortality. Bariatric surgery is currently the only modality that provides a significant, sustained weight loss for morbidly obese patients, with resultant improvement in obesity-related comorbidities. A prospective, controlled Swedish study involving 4047 obese patients, half of whom had undergone bariatric procedures, followed up over 14.7 years, found that compared to usual care, bariatric surgery was associated with a significantly reduced number of cardiovascular deaths and a lower incidence of cardiovascular events in obese adults. [ 
         Essential update: 2015 ESPGHAN guidelines for bariatric surgery in children In January 2015, the European Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition (ESPGHAN) published a position statement on bariatric surgery for severely obese children and adolescents, which provided the following guidelines [ 
           
             Consider bariatric surgery in "carefully selected" patients with a body mass index (BMI) higher than 40 kg/m 2 2 
             Additional factors to consider in deciding whether a child or adolescent should undergo bariatric surgery include physical and psychological maturity, personal desire to undergo the procedure, previous attempts at weight loss, and ability to adhere to follow-up care  
             Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding, and sleeve gastrectomy are the most widely used procedures in pediatric obesity, but their use is associated with subsequent nutritional deficiencies; temporary intragastric devices could represent a better option for initial treatment in pediatric populations  
             Current evidence suggests that bariatric surgery can decrease the grade of steatosis, hepatic inflammation, and fibrosis in NAFLD  
             Uncomplicated NAFLD is not an indication for bariatric surgery 
             Roux-en-Y gastric bypass is considered a safe and effective option for extremely obese adolescents, as long as appropriate long-term follow-up is provided  
             Laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding has not been approved by the FDA for use in adolescents and therefore should be considered investigational  
             Sleeve gastrectomy and other types of weight loss surgery that have grown increasingly common in adults must still be considered investigational  
       History of the Procedure 
         In 1954, Kremen and Linner introduced jejunoileal bypass, the first effective surgery for obesity in the United States. In this procedure, the proximal jejunum was connected directly to the distal ileum, bypassing 90% of the small intestine out of the intestinal stream of ingested nutrients (blind loop). The procedure induced a state of  malabsorption Modifications in the original procedures and the development of new techniques have led to 3 basic concepts for bariatric surgery: (1) gastric restriction (adjustable gastric banding, sleeve gastrectomy), (2) gastric restriction with mild malabsorption (Roux-en-Y gastric bypass), and (3) a combination of mild gastric restriction and malabsorption (duodenal switch). (See images below.) 
           Adjustable gastric banding.  Adjustable gastric banding.  
           Sleeve gastrectomy.  Sleeve gastrectomy.  
           Laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass.  Laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass.  
           Long Roux-en-Y gastric bypass.  Long Roux-en-Y gastric bypass.  
           Biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch.  Biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch.  
       Problem 
         The most widely accepted measure of obesity is the body mass index (BMI). This number is calculated by dividing a patient's mass (in kilograms) by his or her height (in meters, squared). A normal BMI is considered in the range of 18.5-24.9 kg/m 2 2 2 Considering other factors (eg, total muscle mass, waist circumference) besides the BMI may be important. For example, an extremely muscular individual may have an elevated BMI without being considered overweight. Waist circumference has been shown to be an excellent indicator of abdominal fat mass. A circumference of greater than 88 cm (35 in) in women or greater than 102 cm (40 in) in men strongly correlates with an increased risk of obesity-related disease.  
       Epidemiology 
         Frequency The number of overweight individuals in the world is estimated at 1.7 billion. In the United States, the problem is at epidemic proportions. Up to two thirds of the population in the United States is overweight, and half of the people in this group can be classified as obese.  
       Etiology 
         Obesity is a complex, multifactorial chronic disease influenced by the interaction of several factors, such as genetic, endocrine, metabolic, environmental (social and cultural), behavioral, and psychological components. The basic mechanism occurs when energy intake exceeds energy output.  
       Pathophysiology 
         Obesity occurs as the result of an imbalance between energy expenditure and caloric intake. This imbalance has been thought to be under genetic and environmental influence. The discovery of immunological abnormalities in obesity that are related to the leptin-proopiomelanocortin system and elevated tumor necrosis factor-alpha brought a new perspective to the understanding of obesity.  Leptin is a hormone made primarily in adipocytes. Leptin is from the Greek word  leptos 
       Presentation 
         Morbid obesity is the harbinger of many other diseases that affect essentially every organ system. 
           
             Cardiovascular (eg, hypertension, atherosclerotic heart and peripheral vascular disease with myocardial infarction and cerebral vascular accidents, peripheral venous insufficiency, thrombophlebitis, pulmonary embolism)  
             Respiratory (eg, asthma, obstructive sleep apnea, obesity-hypoventilation syndrome) 
             Metabolic (eg, type 2 diabetes, impaired glucose tolerance, hyperlipidemia) 
             Musculoskeletal (eg, back strain; disc disease; weightbearing osteoarthritis of the hips, knees, ankles, and feet) 
             Gastrointestinal (eg,  cholelithiasis gastroesophageal reflux disease 
             Urologic (eg, stress incontinence) 
             Endocrine and reproductive (eg, polycystic ovary syndrome, increased risk of pregnancy and fetal abnormalities, male hypogonadism) 
             Cancer of the endometrium, breast, ovary, prostate, and pancreas 
             Dermatologic (eg, intertriginous dermatitis) 
             Neurologic (eg,  pseudotumor cerebri 
             Psychologic (eg, depression, eating disorders, body image disturbance) 
       Indications 
         Surgery for obesity should be considered as a treatment of last resort after dieting, exercise, psychotherapy, and drug treatments have failed. Developed at the 1991 National Institutes of Health (NIH) Consensus Development Conference Panel, the generally accepted criteria for surgical treatment include a BMI of greater than 40 kg/m 2 2 
       Contraindications 
         Contraindications to bariatric surgery include illnesses that greatly reduce life expectancy and are unlikely to be improved with weight reduction, including advanced cancer and end-stage renal, hepatic, and cardiopulmonary disease. Patients who are unable to understand the nature of bariatric surgery or the behavioral changes required afterward, including untreated schizophrenia, active substance abuse, and noncompliance with previous medical care, are also considered contraindications to bariatric surgery. 
     Workup 
       Laboratory Studies 
         Preoperative laboratory evaluation should include a complete blood count (CBC), a complete chemistry panel, liver function tests, thyroid function tests, a lipid profile, coagulation tests, serum iron and total iron binding capacity (TIBC), vitamin B-12, folic acid, blood typing, and urinalysis.  
       Imaging Studies 
         See the list below: 
           
             Chest radiography 
             Ultrasonography of the gallbladder 
       Diagnostic Procedures 
         Upper endoscopy is performed to rule out intrinsic upper gastrointestinal disease, because, after gastric bypass surgery, the ability to nonsurgically visualize the distal stomach and the duodenum could be a challenge.  
     Treatment & Management 
       Medical Therapy 
         A preoperative trial of weight loss is beneficial to ensure patient compliance with the postoperative diet protocol. Also, a preoperative liquid diet can shrink the liver, thus facilitating the surgical procedure.  
       Surgical Therapy 
         Types of bariatric surgery include the following: 
           
             Restrictive procedures (eg, adjustable gastric banding, sleeve gastrectomy) 
             Restrictive procedures with some malabsorption (eg, Roux-en-Y gastric bypass) 
             Malabsorptive procedures with some restriction (eg, biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch) Bariatric surgery can be performed by an open technique and by a laparoscopic technique. The laparoscopic approach has currently become the more popular approach.  
         Gastric bypass Gastric bypass is currently the most popular procedure performed in the United States. (See image below.) This procedure has earned the reputation of being the gold standard, against which other procedures are compared. The procedure has a restrictive and a malabsorptive component. 
           Laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass.  Laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass.  The gastric bypass provides a substantial amount of dietary restriction. The restriction is created by the small stomach pouch, which gives the patient a feeling of satiety after eating a small meal. The restrictive element of the operation consists of the creation of a small gastric pouch (approximately 20 mL in volume) and probably a small outlet that, on distention by food, causes the sensation of satiety.  In addition, the gastric bypass provides a small-to-moderate degree of intentional malabsorption due to the separation of food, which passes through the alimentary limb of the Y, from the biliopancreatic secretions, which pass through the biliopancreatic limb of the Y. The degree of malabsorption can be adjusted by modifying the length of the alimentary and biliopancreatic limbs.  The malabsorptive element is a result of bypassing the distal stomach, the entire duodenum, and varying the length of the jejunum. The extent of the bypass of the intestine determines the degree of macronutrient malabsorption. The standard Roux limb is about 75 cm. More extensive malabsorptive variations consist of gastric bypasses with a 150-cm Roux limb (long-limb) or with a very long-limb (distal gastric bypass). In addition to restricting food intake, causing some degree of malabsorption, it also causes  dumping syndrome Weight loss after a standard 75-cm Roux gastric bypass usually exceeds 100 lb or about 65-70% of excess body weight and about 35% of BMI. The longer-limb bypasses are used to obtain comparable weight reductions in patients who are super obese (BMI >50 kg/m 2 
         Reversal For all bariatric procedures, pure reversal without conversion to another bariatric procedure is almost certainly followed by a return to morbid obesity. Gastric bypass can be reversed, though this is rarely required.  
         Revision A standard Roux gastric bypass with failed weight loss can be revised to a very long-limb Roux-en-Y procedure or the dilated gastric pouch can be revised. (See image below.) 
           Long Roux-en-Y gastric bypass.  Long Roux-en-Y gastric bypass.  After gastric bypass surgery, some patients may experience dumping syndrome upon ingestion of sweets. This is caused by the rapid passage of gastric pouch contents directly into the small bowel, unimpeded by a pyloric valve. The presence of concentrated simple sugars in the Roux limb presents a substantial osmotic load that may result in cramping and abdominal discomfort; additionally, the ensuing rapid release of insulin by the pancreas may cause symptomatic hypoglycemia. This unpleasant reaction to sugar is considered to be a desired effect of gastric bypass surgery, and it has been referred to by patients as the postoperative police officer.  Weight loss after gastric bypass has been shown to be greater than that obtained by dietary, medical, behavioral, or combined approaches to weight loss.  A long-term follow-up study performed by MacLean et al defined postoperative success as a reduction in weight to a BMI of less than 35 kg/m 2 [ 2 2 Since its initial description in 1994 by Wittgrove and others, the laparoscopic gastric bypass approach has been shown to combine the efficacy of the open approach with the decreased pain, lower wound morbidity, and shorter convalescence of a minimally invasive procedure. [ [ A prospective, randomized trial was completed that compared the results of laparoscopic gastric bypass to the results of open gastric bypass. Patients who had undergone laparoscopic gastric bypass were found to have substantially less impairment of pulmonary function after surgery and decreased postoperative pain.  In the author's experience, the convalescence after laparoscopic gastric bypass is substantially reduced relative to open procedures, with some patients returning to work in 2 weeks or less.  
         Laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding Laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding is the most common bariatric procedure and is performed in Europe, Australia, and South America. (See image below.) In June 2001, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved it for use in the United States. Lap-Band (Inamed) is the only device approved for this use in the United States. 
           Adjustable gastric banding.  Adjustable gastric banding.  The device consists of an adjustable inflatable band placed around the proximal part of the stomach. This creates a small gastric pouch (approximately 15 mL in volume) and a small stoma. Band restriction is adjustable by adding or removing saline from the inflatable band by a reservoir system of saline attached to the band and accessible through a port, which is attached by a catheter to the band. The port is placed subcutaneously in the anterior abdominal wall after the band is secured around the stomach.  Adjustment of the band through the access port is an essential part of laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding therapy. Appropriate adjustments, performed up to 6 times annually, are critical for successful outcomes. Patients must chew food thoroughly to allow food to pass through the band. Adjusting the inflation of the cuff changes the size of the opening through which food passes but does not change the size of the gastric pouch; deflation of the cuff is useful when the outlet is obstructed.  Weight loss after laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding is about 50-60% of excess body weight in approximately 2 years. Laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding can be completely reversed with removal of the band, tubing, and port. Combining laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding with gastric plication may improve weight-loss outcomes, at least in the short term. [ 
         Biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch Biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch (see the image below) includes the following: 
           
             Lateral 75% gastrectomy, resulting in a tubular stomach 
             Duodenum divided past the pyloric valve 
             Ileum divided 
             Distal end anastomosed to proximal duodenum 
             Common channel created distally with Y-anastomosis 
             Optional appendectomy and cholecystectomy 
               Biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch.  Biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch.  Malabsorption is achieved by separating food from biliopancreatic digestive fluids. More weight loss results from fat malabsorption. Protein absorption is also reduced. This has the best weight loss with the least regain. There is less disruption of eating patterns. Early weight loss is from restriction and malabsorption, and, later, it is mostly from malabsorption; 75-85% of excess body weight loss is at 18 months. Pyloric preservation protects against marginal ulceration and dumping syndrome.  The procedure is technically challenging and difficult to reverse. Insurance companies may not cover this procedure because it is still considered investigational.  
         Laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy Laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy (LSG), a type of unbanded gastroplasty, employs subtotal gastric resection to create a long lesser curvature–based gastric conduit. (See the image below.) 
           Sleeve gastrectomy.  Sleeve gastrectomy.  In this procedure, the stomach is reduced to about 15-20% of its original size by the surgical removal of a large portion of the stomach, following the greater curve. The mechanism of weight loss and resultant comorbidity improvement that follows sleeve gastrectomy may be related to gastric restriction or to neurohumoral changes observed following the procedure (due to the gastric resection). Sleeve gastrectomy has been used as the first of a 2-stage procedure for high-risk patients, [ [ [ Compared with other bariatric procedures, sleeve gastrectomy is the more physiologic treatment, because it does not involve malabsorption, abnormal tracts, blind tracts, or the placement of a foreign body. This procedure is widely performed laparoscopically. [ Hutter et all conducted the first large, prospective, multiinstitutional study comparing 1-yr outcomes of LSG to other procedures. Results show LSG has morbidity and effectiveness between laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding and standard Roux bypass. [ As with other bariatric procedures that involve stomach transaction, the main drawback of sleeve gastrectomy is the severity of postoperative complications. The use of staple-line reinforcement was shown to be associated with improved perioperative outcomes and can be considered as an effective method for preventing leaks. [ A larger, prospective comparative study involving 187 patients undergoing the laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy procedure found that reinforcement of the staple line with bovine pericardium strips was associated with a significant reduction in bleeding from the staple line and intraabdominal collections, whereas the leak rate was not significantly reduced. It is unclear, though, if controlling for high BMI, previous bariatric surgery, and diabetes was taken into account. [ In a randomized study that involved 120 patients who had undergone laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy, using either polyglycolide acid with tri-methylene carbonate or gelatin ﬁbrinmatrix for SLR wasfound to be faster compared to oversewing, whereas no significant differences in postoperative complications were observed between the three methods. [ 
         Incision reduction strategies There has been a growing trend in bariatric surgery toward reduction of abdominal incisions, a change offering much-improved cosmetic outcomes and, potentially, shorter patient hospital stays. (See the image below.) 
           Progression of surgical techniques, with open surgery in the first image and single-incision,... Progression of surgical techniques, with open surgery in the first image and single-incision, transumbilical laparoscopic surgery in the third illustration.  Such minimally invasive surgery also provides, as a result of decreased abdominal trauma, reductions in pain, scarring, and tissue injury. Saber and colleagues developed a single-incision, transumbilical laparoscopic approach for sleeve gastrectomies, in which the procedure is performed mainly through the umbilicus; the sleeve is extracted through the umbilicus without extending the incision. [ In addition, Saber and colleagues developed a single-incision, transumbilical laparoscopic technique for the placement of an adjustable gastric band; in addition to offering the aforementioned benefits of such an approach, this technique facilitates later outpatient adjustment of the band.  
       Preoperative Details 
         The diversity of clinical and occult obesity-related comorbidities necessitates a multidisciplinary team approach in the preoperative evaluation of the patient who is morbidly obese. This evaluation will enhance the postoperative outcome. Preoperative cardiac, pulmonary, psychiatric, and endocrine evaluations may be necessary. These evaluations help to exclude patients who may not benefit from surgery; at the same time, they optimize those considered being potential good candidates for surgery. Preoperative nutritional consultation helps in obtaining a detailed diet history and in explaining preoperative and postoperative diet protocol.  
       Intraoperative Details 
         See Surgical Therapy. 
       Postoperative Details 
         After surgery, patients must remain on a high-protein, low-fat diet, and they must supplement their diet with multivitamins, iron, and calcium, usually on a twice-daily basis. Ursodiol may be given to minimize the risk of developing gallstones during the period of acute weight loss. Patients must modify their eating habits by avoiding chewy meats and other foods that may inhibit normal emptying of their stomach pouch. Nutritional and metabolic blood tests must be performed on a frequent basis; in the author's practice, these tests are performed at 6 months after surgery, 12 months after surgery, and then annually thereafter.  
         Post – bariatric surgery body contouring Massive weight loss is associated with negative consequences for the body, such as flabby skin, abdominal skin overhang, and pendulous breasts. The excess skin does not contract back to its preweight gain tightness. Redundant rolls of tissue may also be associated with intertrigo and significant hygiene problems. Surgical correction of these body deformities can significantly enhance physical and physiological changes. The usual time lapse between gastric bypass and plastic surgery procedures is 12-18 months.  Treatment alternatives for body contouring procedures include lipoplasty, conventional surgery, or a combination of the 2 procedures. Conventional contouring procedures include abdominoplasty, buttock lift, lower body lift, thigh lift, upper arm lift, facelift, breast reduction, mastopexy, and/or augmentation. Multiple procedures are usually required, and a staged approach to body contouring surgery following bariatric surgery seems to improve safety and outcomes.  Complications of body contouring procedures include hematomas and seromas, as well as fat necrosis, skin slough, infection, and deep vein thrombosis. In addition, the patient should be involved with a team that assesses nutritional and psychological issues as needed. [ 
       Follow-up 
         For patient education resources, see the  Healthy Living Center Obesity Surgery in the Treatment of Obesity 
       Complications 
         Early complications of Roux-en-Y gastric bypass are as follows: 
           
             Anastomotic leak (1-3%) 
             Pulmonary embolism, deep vein thrombosis (< 1%) 
             Wound infection (more common with open approach) 
             Gastrointestinal hemorrhage, bleeding (0.5-2%) 
             Respiratory insufficiency, pneumonia 
             Acute distention of the distal stomach Late complications (less frequent and less dramatic than with gastric banding) of the Roux-en-Y procedure are as follows: 
           
             Stomal stenosis, most common (20%) 
             Bowel obstruction, small bowel obstruction (1%) 
             Internal hernia 
             Cholelithiasis 
             Micronutrient deficiencies 
             Marginal ulcer 
             Staple line disruption 
             Ventral hernia formation (more prevalent after open approach) Although there is a statistical increase in the number of patients needing cholecystectomy after obesity surgery, the number is small enough to prevent suggesting a prophylactic procedure at the time of their bariatric surgery. [ Risk factors associated with an increased risk of postoperative morbidity include recent myocardial infarction/angina, stroke, bleeding disorder, hypertension, and higher BMI. [ Lifelong oral or intramuscular vitamin B-12 supplementation and iron, vitamin B, folate, and calcium supplementation are recommended to avoid specific nutrient deficiency conditions, such as anemia.  Early complications of the adjustable gastric band procedure are as follows: 
           
             Injury of the stomach or esophagus 
             Bleeding 
             Food intolerance (most common immediate postoperative complication) 
             Wound infection 
             Pneumonia Late complications are as follows: 
           
             Food intolerance or noncompliance to band (13%) 
             Band slippage (stomach prolapse) (2.2-8%) 
             Pouch dilatation 
             Band erosion into the stomach 
             Port complications 
             Reoperation rate (2-41%) 
             Esophageal dilatation 
             Failure to lose weight 
             Port infection, band infection 
             Leakage of the balloon or tubing 
             Mortality rate (0.5%; 0% in some series) Because the biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch procedure is less well known, the complications are potentially more problematic if the surgeon is unfamiliar with the procedure.  Fat malabsorption results in diarrhea and foul-smelling gas in approximately 30% of patients. The potential nutritional deficiencies mandate frequent follow-up visits, with close monitoring and supplementation of multivitamins and minerals. 
           
             Malabsorption of fat soluble vitamins (vitamins A, D, E, and K) 
             Vitamin A deficiency, which causes night blindness 
             Vitamin D deficiency, which causes osteoporosis 
             Iron deficiency (similar incidence to Roux-en-Y gastric bypass procedure) 
             Protein-energy malnutrition (may require a second operation to lengthen the common channel) 
       Outcome and Prognosis 
         Care of the postoperative bariatric surgery patient is recommended for the lifetime of the patient, with at least 3 follow-up visits with the bariatric surgery team within the first year. Laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding requires more frequent visits for band adjustment. Postoperative dietary changes (including vitamin, mineral, and possibly liquid protein supplementation), exercise, and lifestyle changes should be reinforced by counseling, support groups, and the patient's family physician.  Favorable outcomes of bariatric surgery can lead to socioeconomic advancement, which may require patient guidance. Postoperative care may also include planning for reconstructive operations after weight stabilization for certain patients. The Swedish Obese Subjects (SOS) study is an ongoing, prospective study of 2010 obese participants who underwent bariatric surgery and 2037 obese patients who received usual care in the primary health care system. Compared to the control group, obese adults who underwent surgery experienced a reduced number of cardiovascular deaths and a lower incidence of heart attack and stroke. [ Low back pain is a common complaint among obese patients. A retrospective study of morbidly obese patients who underwent bariatric surgery found that patients experienced a significant decrease in low back and radicular pain after surgery, which led to improvements in quality of life. Patients also experienced a marked increase in the L4-5 intervertebral disc height. [ An Australian study by Keating et al compared the results of weight-loss treatments in patients who had been diagnosed with type 2 diabetes mellitus in class I/II obesity, estimating the lifetime costs and quality-adjusted life-years (QALYs) for individuals who had undergone surgically induced weight loss and for patients who had utilized conventional weight loss treatment. [ The investigators found that the mean length of time for diabetes remission over a lifetime was 11.4 years for patients who had undergone surgical treatment and 2.1 years for patients who had utilized conventional therapy. Over the remainder of their lifetime, patients in the surgical therapy group lived 15.7 discounted QALYs, compared with 14.5 discounted QALYs for patients in the conventional therapy group. For surgical and conventional therapy patients, the mean discounted lifetime costs were, respectively, 98,900 and 101,400 Australian dollars per patient (1 Australian dollar = 0.74 US dollars). Compared with conventional therapy, surgically induced weight loss was associated with a mean health care saving of 2,400 Australian dollars and with 1.2 additional QALYs per patient. In another study, Keating and coauthors looked at the within-trial cost efficacy, over 2 years, of surgical treatment relative to that of conventional therapy for achieving remission in patients recently diagnosed with type 2 diabetes mellitus with class I/II obesity. [ An incremental cost-effectiveness analysis demonstrated that the mean 2-year intervention costs per patient were 13,400 Australian dollars for surgical therapy and 3,400 Australian dollars for conventional therapy; laparoscopic adjustable gastric band (LAGB) surgery was responsible for 85% of the difference. For surgical patients, outpatient medical consultation costs were 3-fold greater than those for conventional patients, but medication costs were 1.5 times higher for patients who underwent conventional therapy. The cost differences occurred primarily in the trial's first 6 months. In relation to conventional treatment, the incremental cost-effectiveness ratio for surgical therapy was 16,600 Australian dollars per case of diabetes remitted. An updated Cochrane review from 2014 that included 22 trials with 1798 participants concluded that surgical treatment of obesity yielded greater improvement in weight loss and weight-associated comorbidities than nonsurgical interventions did, regardless of the type of procedure, [ In this review, Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB) and sleeve gastrectomy had comparable outcomes, and both had better outcomes than adjustable gastric banding. [ In general, with all 22 studies taken into account, rates of adverse events and reoperation were not well reported. [ 
       Future and Controversies 
         Over the past 10 years, the field of bariatric surgery has been enriched by data from numerous clinical investigations and experience. The direction of future clinical investigations is manifold and includes the following:  
           
             Controlled, prospective, intervention studies 
             Establishment of a major prospective database to study bariatric surgery outcomes 
             Establishment of a pediatric (adolescent) bariatric surgery registry 
             Performance of randomized clinical trials to compare the safety and efficacy of different operative procedures 
             Controlled studies of new operative modalities (eg, gastric pacing) and nonoperative modalities of treatment 
             Study by meta-analysis of outcomes of comorbid conditions of morbid obesity 
             Study of the socioeconomic outcomes of bariatric surgery 
             Study by stratified risk assessment of the risk-to-benefit ratio of treating morbid obesity with bariatric surgery and without bariatric surgery  
     start media 
       
         Laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass.  Laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass.  
       
         Adjustable gastric banding.  Adjustable gastric banding.  
       
         Sleeve gastrectomy.  Sleeve gastrectomy.  
       
         Long Roux-en-Y gastric bypass.  Long Roux-en-Y gastric bypass.  
       
         Biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch.  Biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch.  
       
         Progression of surgical techniques, with open surgery in the first image and single-incision,... Progression of surgical techniques, with open surgery in the first image and single-incision, transumbilical laparoscopic surgery in the third illustration.  
     
       Author 
         Alan A Saber, MD, MS, FACS FASMBS, Director of Bariatric and Metabolic Surgery, University Hospitals Case Medical Center; Surgical Director, Bariatric Surgery, Metabolic and Nutrition Center, University Hospitals Digestive Health Institute; Associate Professor of Surgery, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine Alan A Saber, MD, MS, FACS is a member of the following medical societies:  American College of Surgeons American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery American Society for Gastrointestinal Endoscopy Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Coauthor(s) 
         Tarek H El-Ghazaly, MD Fellow of Minimally Invasive and Bariatric Surgery Research, Michigan State University, Kalamazoo Center for Medical Studies Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Pharmacy Editor 
         Francisco Talavera, PharmD, PhD Adjunct Assistant Professor, University of Nebraska Medical Center College of Pharmacy; Editor-in-Chief, Medscape Drug Reference Disclosure: Received salary from Medscape for employment. for: Medscape. 
       Chief Editor 
         John Geibel, MD, DSc, MSc, MA Vice Chair and Professor, Department of Surgery, Section of Gastrointestinal Medicine, and Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Yale University School of Medicine; Director, Surgical Research, Department of Surgery, Yale-New Haven Hospital; American Gastroenterological Association Fellow John Geibel, MD, DSc, MSc, MA is a member of the following medical societies:  American Gastroenterological Association American Physiological Society American Society of Nephrology Association for Academic Surgery International Society of Nephrology New York Academy of Sciences Society for Surgery of the Alimentary Tract Disclosure: Received royalty from AMGEN for consulting; Received ownership interest from Ardelyx for consulting. 
       Additional Contributors 
         Brian J Daley, MD, MBA, FACS, FCCP, CNSC Professor and Program Director, Department of Surgery, Chief, Division of Trauma and Critical Care, University of Tennessee Health Science Center College of Medicine Brian J Daley, MD, MBA, FACS, FCCP, CNSC is a member of the following medical societies:  American Association for the Surgery of Trauma Eastern Association for the Surgery of Trauma Southern Surgical Association American College of Chest Physicians American College of Surgeons American Medical Association Association for Academic Surgery Association for Surgical Education Shock Society Society of Critical Care Medicine Southeastern Surgical Congress Tennessee Medical Association Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
     Acknowledgements 
       We wish to thank Ollie J Jackson III, MD, Department of General Surgery, Michigan State University, Kalamazoo Center for Medical Studies, for previous contributions to this entry.  
     
       Sjöström L,  Peltonen M,  Jacobson P,  Sjöström CD,  Karason K,  Wedel H, et al. Bariatric surgery and long-term cardiovascular events.  JAMA [Medline] 
       Tucker ME. New guidelines address bariatric surgery in children.  Medscape Medical News [Full Text] 
       Nobili V,  Vajro P,  Dezsofi A,  Fischler B,  Hadzic N,  Jahnel J, et al. Indications and Limitations of Bariatric Intervention in Severely Obese Children and Adolescents With and Without Non-alcoholic Steatohepatitis: the ESPGHAN Hepatology Committee Position Statement.  J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr [Medline] 
       MacLean LD, Rhode BM, Nohr CW. Late outcome of isolated gastric bypass.  Ann Surg [Medline] 
       Wittgrove AC, Clark GW, Tremblay LJ. Laparoscopic Gastric Bypass, Roux-en-Y: Preliminary Report of Five Cases.  Obes Surg [Medline] 
       Higa KD, Ho T, Boone KB. Laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass: technique and 3-year follow-up.  J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A [Medline] 
       Lee WJ, Lee KT, Ser KH, Chen JC, Tsou JJ, Lee YC. Laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding (LAGB) with gastric plication: Short-term results and comparison with LAGB alone and sleeve gastrectomy.  Surg Obes Relat Dis [Medline] 
       Regan JP, Inabnet WB, Gagner M, et al. Early experience with two-stage laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass as an alternative in the super-super obese patient.  Obes Surg [Medline] 
       Himpens J, Dapri G, Cadière GB. A prospective randomized study between laparoscopic gastric banding and laparoscopic isolated sleeve gastrectomy: results after 1 and 3 years.  Obes Surg [Medline] 
       Lee CM, Cirangle PT, Jossart GH. Vertical gastrectomy for morbid obesity in 216 patients: report of two-year results.  Surg Endosc [Medline] 
       Cottam D, Qureshi FG, Mattar SG, Sharma S, Holover S, Bonanomi G. Laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy as an initial weight-loss procedure for high-risk patients with morbid obesity.  Surg Endosc [Medline] 
       Hamoui N, Anthone GJ, Kaufman HS, Crookes PF. Sleeve gastrectomy in the high-risk patient.  Obes Surg [Medline] 
       Silecchia G, Boru C, Pecchia A, Rizzello M, Casella G, Leonetti F. Effectiveness of laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy (first stage of biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch) on co-morbidities in super-obese high-risk patients.  Obes Surg [Medline] 
       Himpens J, Dapri G, Cadière GB. A prospective randomized study between laparoscopic gastric banding and laparoscopic isolated sleeve gastrectomy: results after 1 and 3 years.  Obes Surg [Medline] 
       Baltasar A, Serra C, Pérez N, Bou R, Bengochea M, Ferri L. Laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy: a multi-purpose bariatric operation.  Obes Surg [Medline] 
       Roa PE, Kaidar-Person O, Pinto D, Cho M, Szomstein S, Rosenthal RJ. Laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy as treatment for morbid obesity: technique and short-term outcome.  Obes Surg [Medline] 
       Langer FB, Bohdjalian A, Felberbauer FX, Fleischmann E, Reza Hoda MA, Ludvik B. Does gastric dilatation limit the success of sleeve gastrectomy as a sole operation for morbid obesity?.  Obes Surg [Medline] 
       Melissas J, Koukouraki S, Askoxylakis J, Stathaki M, Daskalakis M, Perisinakis K. Sleeve gastrectomy: a restrictive procedure?.  Obes Surg [Medline] 
       Almogy G, Crookes PF, Anthone GJ. Longitudinal gastrectomy as a treatment for the high-risk super-obese patient.  Obes Surg [Medline] 
       Milone L, Strong V, Gagner M. Laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy is superior to endoscopic intragastric balloon as a first stage procedure for super-obese patients (BMI > or =50).  Obes Surg [Medline] 
       Moy J, Pomp A, Dakin G, Parikh M, Gagner M. Laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy for morbid obesity.  Am J Surg [Medline] 
       Saber AA, Elgamal MH, Itawi EA, Rao AJ. Single incision laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy (SILS): a novel technique.  Obes Surg [Medline] 
       Gagner M, Gumbs AA, Milone L, Yung E, Goldenberg L, Pomp A. Laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy for the super-super-obese (body mass index >60 kg/m(2)).  Surg Today [Medline] 
       American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery - Statements, Guidelines, Action Items. Available at  http://www.asmbs.org/Newsite07/resources/asmbs_items.htm 
       Hutter MM,  Schirmer BD,  Jones DB,  Ko CY,  Cohen ME,  Merkow RP, et al. First Report from the American College of Surgeons Bariatric Surgery Center Network: Laparoscopic Sleeve Gastrectomy has Morbidity and Effectiveness Positioned Between the Band and the Bypass.  Ann Surg [Medline] 
       Daskalakis M, Berdan Y, Theodoridou S, Weigand G, Weiner RA. Impact of surgeon experience and buttress material on postoperative complications after laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy.  Surg Endosc [Medline] 
       Stamou KM,  Menenakos E,  Dardamanis D,  Arabatzi C,  Alevizos L,  Albanopoulos K, et al. Prospective comparative study of the efficacy of staple-line reinforcement in laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy.  Surg Endosc [Medline] 
       Gentileschi P, Camperchioli I, D'Ugo S, Benavoli D, Gaspari AL. Staple-line reinforcement during laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy using three different techniques: a randomized trial.  Surg Endosc [Medline] 
       de Zwaan M,  Georgiadou E,  Stroh CE,  Teufel M,  Köhler H,  Tengler M, et al. Body image and quality of life in patients with and without body contouring surgery following bariatric surgery: a comparison of pre- and post-surgery groups.  Front Psychol [Medline] 
       Plecka Östlund M, Wenger U, Mattsson F, Ebrahim F, Botha A, Lagergren J. Population-based study of the need for cholecystectomy after obesity surgery.  Br J Surg [Medline] 
       Gupta PK, Franck C, Miller WJ, Gupta H, Forse RA. Development and Validation of a Bariatric Surgery Morbidity Risk Calculator Using the Prospective, Multicenter NSQIP Dataset.  J Am Coll Surg [Medline] 
       Sjöström L,  Peltonen M,  Jacobson P,  Sjöström CD,  Karason K,  Wedel H, et al. Bariatric surgery and long-term cardiovascular events.  JAMA [Medline] 
       Romeo S,  Maglio C,  Burza MA,  Pirazzi C,  Sjöholm K,  Jacobson P, et al. Cardiovascular Events After Bariatric Surgery in Obese Subjects With Type 2 Diabetes.  Diabetes Care [Medline] 
       Lidar Z,  Behrbalk E,  Regev GJ,  Salame K,  Keynan O,  Schweiger C, et al. Intervertebral Disc Height Changes after Weight Reduction in Morbid Obese Patients, its Effect on Life Quality, Radicular and Low Back Pain.  Spine (Phila Pa 1976) [Medline] 
       Keating CL, Dixon JB, Moodie ML, et al. Cost-effectiveness of surgically induced weight loss for the management of type 2 diabetes: modeled lifetime analysis.  Diabetes Care [Medline] 
       Keating CL, Dixon JB, Moodie ML, et al. Cost-efficacy of surgically induced weight loss for the management of type 2 diabetes: a randomized controlled trial.  Diabetes Care [Medline] 
       Colquitt JL, Pickett K, Loveman E, Frampton GK. Surgery for weight loss in adults.  Cochrane Database Syst Rev [Medline] 
       Balsiger BM, Murr MM, Poggio JL, Sarr MG. Bariatric surgery. Surgery for weight control in patients with morbid obesity.  Med Clin North Am [Medline] 
       Belachew M, Legrand M, Vincent V, Lismonde M, Le Docte N, Deschamps V. Laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding.  World J Surg [Medline] 
       Brolin RE, Kenler HA, Gorman JH, Cody RP. Long-limb gastric bypass in the superobese. A prospective randomized study.  Ann Surg [Medline] 
       Considine RV,  Sinha MK,  Heiman ML,  Kriauciunas A,  Stephens TW,  Nyce MR, et al. Serum immunoreactive-leptin concentrations in normal-weight and obese humans.  N Engl J Med [Medline] 
       Mantzoros CS. The role of leptin in human obesity and disease: a review of current evidence.  Ann Intern Med [Medline] 
       Nguyen NT,  Goldman C,  Rosenquist CJ,  Arango A,  Cole CJ,  Lee SJ, et al. Laparoscopic versus open gastric bypass: a randomized study of outcomes, quality of life, and costs.  Ann Surg [Medline] 
       Podnos YD, Jimenez JC, Wilson SE, Stevens CM, Nguyen NT. Complications after laparoscopic gastric bypass: a review of 3464 cases.  Arch Surg [Medline] 
       Saber AA. Gastric pacing: a new modality for the treatment of morbid obesity.  J Invest Surg [Medline] 
       Saber AA, Boros MJ, Mancl T, et al. The effect of laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass on fibromyalgia.  Obes Surg [Medline] 
       Saber AA, El-Ghazaly TH. Early experience with single incision transumbilical laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding using the SILS Port.  Int J Surg [Medline] 
       Saber AA, El-Ghazaly TH. Early experience with single-access transumbilical adjustable laparoscopic gastric banding.  Obes Surg [Medline] 
       Saber AA, El-Ghazaly TH, Elian A. Single-Incision Transumbilical Laparoscopic Sleeve Gastrectomy.  J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A [Medline] 
       Saber AA, Elgamal MH, McLeod MK. Bariatric surgery: the past, present, and future.  Obes Surg [Medline] 
       Saber AA, Jackson O. Omental wrap: a simple technique for reinforcement of the gastrojejunostomy during Roux-en-Y gastric bypass.  Obes Surg [Medline] 
       Saber AA, Scharf KR, Turk AZ, Elgamal MH, Martinez RL. Early Experience with Intraluminal Reinforcement of Stapled Gastrojejunostomy During Laparoscopic Roux-En-Y Gastric Bypass.  Obes Surg [Medline] 
       Schauer PR, Ikramuddin S, Gourash W, Ramanathan R, Luketich J. Outcomes after laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass for morbid obesity.  Ann Surg [Medline] 
       Song S, Itawi EA, Saber AA. Natural orifice translumenal endoscopic surgery (NOTES).  J Invest Surg [Medline]

Article 9:

   
     Pediatric Appendicitis Organism-Specific Therapy 
       Pediatric Appendicitis Organism-Specific Therapy: Organism-Specific Therapy 
       Pediatric Appendicitis Organism-Specific Therapy: Organism-Specific Therapy 
       Overview Organism-Specific Therapy 
       Pediatric Appendicitis Organism-Specific Therapy Overview 1976427-overview Jul 26, 2013 2015-08-04-17:55 1 Pediatrics: General Medicine 2002 Diseases & Conditions Condition 
       1 2 content 1976427 502 6004986 9 age12 
     Jun 04, 2015 
       condition Diseases & Conditions 
       pediatrics_general Pediatrics: General Medicine 
       pediatrics_general_gastroenterology Gastroenterology Organism-specific therapeutic regimens for appendicitis in children are outlined below, including those for anaerobic organisms (including Bacteroides fragilis, Clostridium species [spp], and Prevotella spp), aerobic gram-negative bacilli (including Escherichia coli, Klebsiella spp, and Proteus mirabilis), Pseudomonas aeruginosa, streptococci... 1 Pediatric Appendicitis Organism-Specific Therapy 
     Organism-Specific Therapy 
       Organism-specific therapeutic regimens for appendicitis in children are outlined below, including those for anaerobic organisms (including  Bacteroides fragilis, Clostridium Prevotella Escherichia coli, Klebsiella Proteus mirabilis Pseudomonas aeruginosa, [ 
       Anaerobic organisms (including Bacteroides fragilis, Clostridium spp, Prevotella spp) See the list below: 
         
           Clindamycin or 
           Metronidazole or 
           Ampicillin-sulbactam or 
           Ticarcillin-clavulanate 
       Aerobic gram-negative bacilli (including Escherichia coli, Klebsiella spp, Proteus mirabilis) See the list below: 
         
           Aztreonam or 
           Ampicillin or 
           Cefoxitin or 
           Cefotetan or 
           Cefotaxime or 
           Ceftriaxone 
       Pseudomonas aeruginosa See the list below: 
         
           Aztreonam 90-120 mg/kg/day IV divided q6-8h  or 
           Piperacillin-tazobactam or 
           Imipenem-cilastin 60-100 mg/kg/day IV divided q6h  or 
           Meropenem 
       Streptococci and enterococci See the list below: 
         
           Ampicillin-sulbactam 200 mg/kg/day (based on ampicillin component) IV/IM divided q6h  or 
           Ticarcillin-clavulanate 200-300 mg/kg/day (based on ticarcillin component) IV divided q4-6h  or 
           Piperacillin-tazobactam 200-300 mg/kg/day (based on piperacillin component) IV divided q6-8h  or 
           Imipenem-cilastin 60-100 mg/kg/day IV divided q6h  or 
           Meropenem 60 mg/kg/day IV divided q8h 
       Mixtures of aerobes and anaerobes See the list below: 
         
           Cefoxitin 80-160 mg/kg/day IV divided q4-6h  or 
           Cefotetan 40-80 mg/kg/day IV divided q12h  or 
           Ticarcillin-clavulanate 200-300 mg/kg/day (based on ticarcillin component) IV divided q4-6h  or 
           Piperacillin-tazobactam 200-300 mg/kg/day (based on piperacillin component) IV divided q6-8h  or 
           Ampicillin-sulbactam 200 mg/kg/day (based on ampicillin component) IV/IM divided q6h  or 
           Imipenem-cilastin 60-100 mg/kg/day IV divided q6h  or 
           Meropenem 60 mg/kg/day IV divided q8h 
     
       Author 
         Kara E Hennelly, MD Instructor, Department of Pediatric Emergency Medicine, Children's Hospital Boston Kara E Hennelly, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American Academy of Pediatrics Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Pharmacy Editor 
         Francisco Talavera, PharmD, PhD Adjunct Assistant Professor, University of Nebraska Medical Center College of Pharmacy; Editor-in-Chief, Medscape Drug Reference Disclosure: Received salary from Medscape for employment. for: Medscape. 
       Chief Editor 
         Thomas E Herchline, MD Professor of Medicine, Wright State University, Boonshoft School of Medicine; Medical Director, Public Health, Dayton and Montgomery County, Ohio Thomas E Herchline, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  Alpha Omega Alpha Infectious Diseases Society of Ohio Infectious Diseases Society of America Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
     
       Bundy DG, Byerley JS, Liles EA, Perrin EM, Katznelson J, Rice HE. Does this child have appendicitis?.  JAMA 
       Hernanz-Schulman M. CT and US in the diagnosis of appendicitis: an argument for CT.  Radiology 
       Katz MS, Freitas MS, Tucker JR, Glick P. Appendicitis. Medscape Reference.  Updated January 9, 2009. Available at  http://emedicine.medscape.con/article/926795-overview 
       Kharbanda AB, Taylor GA, Fishman SJ, Bachur RG. A clinical decision rule to identify children at low risk for appendicitis.  Pediatrics 
       Solomkin JS, Mazuski JE, Bradley JS, et al. Diagnosis and management of complicated intra-abdominal infection in adults and children: guidelines by the Surgical Infection Society and the Infectious Diseases Society of America.  Clin Infect Dis 
       Tsao K, St Peter SD, Valusek PA, et al. Management of pediatric acute appendicitis in the computed tomographic era.  J Surg Res

Article 10:

   
     Ankle Block 
       Ankle Block: Overview, Anatomy, Medications 
       Ankle Block: Overview, Anatomy, Medications 
       Overview Overview Anatomy Medications Supplies Superficial Peroneal Nerve Deep Peroneal Nerve Saphenous Nerve Posterior Tibial Nerve Sural Nerve Pearls Contraindications 
       Ankle Block Overview 1999563-overview Aug 06, 2015 2015-08-06-17:30 1 Clinical Procedures 2002 Procedures Procedure 
       1 2 content 1999563 503 5000003 46 ssg 
     Aug 06, 2015 
       procedure Procedures 
       clinical_procedures Clinical Procedures 
       clinical_procedures_anesthetic Anesthetic Techniques ankle block, ankle block procedure, regional anesthesia, ankle anesthesia, ankle, anesthesia Regional anesthesia is increasing in its utility in the treatment of injuries, foreign body removal, and even in the operative setting. By providing a regional block, the affected anatomy can be properly cleaned, explored, and treated without causing unnecessary pain to the patient. 0 Ankle Block 
     Overview 
       Regional anesthesia is increasing in its utility in the treatment of injuries, foreign body removal, and even in the operative setting. By providing a regional block, the affected anatomy can be properly cleaned, explored, and treated without causing unnecessary pain to the patient. In many settings, regional anesthetic is also preferred because it prevents the distortion of the anatomy commonly seen in local anesthesia.  Regional anesthesia of the ankle presents a challenge to the provider because of the complicated nerve supply to the foot and the varied locations of the nerves around the ankle. However, by adequately anesthetizing the foot, patients can be offered relief from often painful injuries while the complex anatomy of the foot is examined and repaired. See  Ankle Joint Anatomy Providing local anesthesia to the foot, particularly to the sole, presents many difficulties. First, the thick but sensitive skin must be penetrated with a needle, which often must be a larger gauge than might be used elsewhere to pass through the skin — this can be very painful. Second, the underlying soft tissue of the sole is tightly bound to the fascia and does not separate easily; injecting even small amounts of anesthesia locally into the sole can result in compression of blood vessels and vascular damage to the tissue that is already injured. But, with regional anesthesia, each of these difficulties can be avoided by blocking the pain sensation carried from the foot at the point where the nerves pass through a safe, readily accessible region of anatomy. [ An image depicting a cross-section of the ankle can be seen below. 
         Cross-section of the ankle.  Cross-section of the ankle.  
     Anatomy 
       Five main nerves originate from the major nerve roots of the lower extremity innervating the foot (see the image below). The dorsal aspect of the foot is innervated by 3 nerves that run on the anterior side of the lower leg and ankle — the superficial peroneal, deep peroneal, and saphenous nerves. The volar aspect of the foot is innervated by the posterior tibial and sural nerves on the posterolateral aspect of the ankle. Complete regional anesthesia of the foot requires blocking each of the 5 nerves. [ 
         Cross-section of the ankle.  Cross-section of the ankle.  
     Medications 
       The most commonly used short-acting subcutaneous anesthetic agent is Lidocaine, which can be given as 1% or 2% mixtures. Epinephrine 1:1000 may be added to both 1% and 2% solutions. Epinephrine is typically added to local anesthetic to cause vasoconstriction, prolonging the activity of the anesthetic and limiting bleeding.  The time between injection and onset of anesthesia with lidocaine is approximately 60-90 seconds, and the effects of lidocaine typically last 20-30 minutes (up to 2 hours if mixed with epinephrine). The maximum dose of lidocaine in adults is 300 mg (3-4 mg/kg in children), when mixed with epinephrine, the maximum dose is 500 mg (7 mg/kg). Bupivacaine 0.25% or 0.5% (Marcaine, Sensorcaine) is a common long-acting anesthetic agent. The time of onset of these long-acting agents is approximately 10-20 minutes, but the anesthetic effects last 4-6 hours alone, and up to 8 hours when mixed with epinephrine. The maximum dose of bupivacaine is 175 mg (2 mg/kg) in an adult, but this is increased to 225 mg (3 mg/kg) when mixed with epinephrine. 50/50 or 25/75 mixtures of lidocaine and bupivacaine may provide the most optimal anesthetic for certain ankle anesthesia, providing nearly immediate relief from pain from the short-acting component, and providing up to 8 hours of anesthesia from the long-acting medication. Because regional anesthesia is administered some distance away from the wound site, and also because epinephrine should be used with great caution in distal extremities, anesthetic medications mixed with vasoconstrictors such as epinephrine are not recommended in ankle anesthesia. 
         Table 1. Maximum Dosing for the Most Common Short-Acting and Long-Acting Local Anesthetic Agents  
           
             
               
                 Medication 
               
                 Adult 
               
                 Pediatrics 
             
               Lidocaine 
               300 mg 
               3-4 mg/kg 
             
               Lidocaine with epinephrine 
               500 mg 
               7 mg/kg 
             
               Bupivacaine 
               175 mg 
               2 mg/kg 
             
               Bupivacaine with epinephrine 
               225 mg 
               3 mg/kg   
     Supplies 
       All injections should be performed under sterile conditions, with the area of injection cleaned with iodine or chlorhexidine. The size of the syringe varies depending on the amount of anesthetic given (keep in mind maximum doses), but all injections should be given with the smallest needle possible in an effort to cause the least pain. A 25-gauge needle is small enough to provide little trauma to the skin and is an excellent choice for administration of anesthesia.  
     Superficial Peroneal Nerve 
       The superficial peroneal nerve provides sensation to most of the dorsum of the foot and the dorsal aspect of each of the toes and web spaces, with the exception of the lateral portion of the great toe and the medial side of the second toe, and corresponding web space. The nerve passes subcutaneously on the anterolateral side of the ankle.  To block this nerve, palpate the extensor hallucis longus tendon and the lateral malleolus. Insert the needle just over the lateral malleolus and tunnel the needle subcutaneously toward the extensor hallucis longus tendon. Complete anesthesia of the superficial peroneal nerve is achieved by placing 5-7 mL of anesthesia in a band-like pattern between these 2 points (see image below). [ As with the administration of any anesthetic, care must be taken to draw back on the syringe before injecting medication to prevent intravascular administration. 
         Superficial peroneal nerve block.  Superficial peroneal nerve block.  
     Deep Peroneal Nerve 
       The deep peroneal nerve provides sensation to the lateral portion of the great toe and medial side of the second digit, as well as the web space between the 2. This distribution is commonly referred to as the “flip-flop” nerve because it innervates the area surrounding the thong of a sandal. This nerve runs deeper in the ankle than the superficial peroneal nerve, hidden behind the extensor hallucis longus tendon.  To provide anesthesia to the “flip-flop” region, first palpate the anterior tibial tendon and the extensor hallucis longus tendon by having the patient dorsiflect the foot and great toe. Insert the needle between these 2 tendons approximately 1 cm superior to the medial malleolus. Draw back to prevent intravascular administration of medication, then deposit 1 mL of anesthetic. Once beyond the extensor hallucis longus tendon, angle the needle toward the lateral malleolus and insert until the tip of the needle rests against the anterior tibia (1-2 cm). Remove the needle 1-2 mm so the tip is not resting against the bone, draw back, and then deposit 5 mL of anesthetic to the deep peroneal nerve (see image below). [ 
         Deep peroneal nerve block.  Deep peroneal nerve block.  
     Saphenous Nerve 
       The saphenous nerve provides sensation to the skin on the medial aspect of the foot along the arch and runs alongside the saphenous vein between the medial malleolus and the anterior tibial tendon.  To anesthetize the arch of the patient’s foot, palpate the anterior tibial tendon and the medial malleolus, and place 3-5 mL of anesthetic in a subcutaneous wheal between these 2 landmarks (see image below). [ 
         Saphenous nerve block.  Saphenous nerve block.  
     Posterior Tibial Nerve 
       The posterior tibial nerve is the largest in the ankle and branches into the medial and lateral plantar nerves in the foot, supplying sensation to the entire volar surface, as well as providing motor innervation to the intrinsic muscles of the foot. It runs deep to the posterior tibial artery.  To anesthetize the sole of a patient’s foot, palpate the posterior tibial artery between the medial malleolus and the achilles tendon. Insert the needle 1 cm superior to the medial malleolus just posterior to the artery with the needle angled toward the lateral malleolus (see image below). Pass the needle until it rests on the posterior aspect of the tibia, then withdraw 1-2 mm, aspirate the syringe to prevent intravascular administration, and place 5-7 mL of anesthetic. An alternative to passing the needle to the posterior tibia is to insert the needle 1-2 cm and wiggle the tip of the needle; paresthesia elicited by movement of the needle tip indicate contact with the posterior tibial nerve. [ 
         Posterior tibial nerve block.  Posterior tibial nerve block.  
     Sural Nerve 
       The sural nerve supplies sensation to the lateral and medial aspects of the foot. It passes between the lateral malleolus and the achilles tendon.  Anesthesia is provided to the sural nerve by first palpating the achilles tendon and the lateral malleolus. Insert the needle 1 cm superior to the lateral malleolus and deposit 5 mL in a band-shaped pattern between the 2 landmarks (see the image below). [ 
         Sural nerve block.  Sural nerve block.  
     Pearls 
       Anesthesia of the posterior tibia nerve may cause loss of sympathetic tone to the vascular supply of the foot resulting in vasodilation. The effect of this vasodilation is increased warmth in the foot and may also result in an increase in blood loss to an injury on the volar aspect of the foot.  Advise patients to pay special attention and care to the anesthetized foot while the affected limb is numb. Avoid re-injecting nerves once anesthesia medication is administered. 
     Contraindications 
       Very few contraindications to local or regional anesthesia of the ankle exist. Injection of local anesthetic should never be performed through infected tissue. 
     start media 
       
         Cross-section of the ankle.  Cross-section of the ankle.  
       
         Superficial peroneal nerve block.  Superficial peroneal nerve block.  
       
         Deep peroneal nerve block.  Deep peroneal nerve block.  
       
         Sural nerve block.  Sural nerve block.  
       
         Saphenous nerve block.  Saphenous nerve block.  
       
         Posterior tibial nerve block.  Posterior tibial nerve block.  
     
       Author 
         Jeff Cloyd, MD Emergency Physician, Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Tennessee Medical Center Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Coauthor(s) 
         Adam J Rosh, MD Assistant Professor, Program Director, Emergency Medicine Residency, Department of Emergency Medicine, Detroit Receiving Hospital, Wayne State University School of Medicine Adam J Rosh, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American Academy of Emergency Medicine American College of Emergency Physicians Society for Academic Emergency Medicine Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Pharmacy Editor 
         Mary L Windle, PharmD Adjunct Associate Professor, University of Nebraska Medical Center College of Pharmacy; Editor-in-Chief, Medscape Drug Reference Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Chief Editor 
         Meda Raghavendra (Raghu), MD Associate Professor, Interventional Pain Management, Department of Anesthesiology, Chicago Stritch School of Medicine, Loyola University Medical Center Meda Raghavendra (Raghu), MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American Society of Anesthesiologists American Society of Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine American Association of Physicians of Indian Origin Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
     
       Spektor M, Kelly J. Regional Anesthesia of the Thorax and Extremities. Roberts, Hedges.  Clinical Procedures in Emergency Medicine 
       Ankle Block, Regional Anesthesia. NYSORA: New York School of Regional Anesthesia. Available at  http://www.nysora.com/peripheral_nerve_blocks/classic_block_tecniques/3035-ankle_block.html 
       Hadzic A, Vloka JD, Kuroda MM, Koorn R, Birnbach DJ. The practice of peripheral nerve blocks in the United States: a national survey [p2e comments].  Reg Anesth Pain Med [Medline] 
       McGee D. Local and Topical Anesthesia. Roberts, Hedges.  Clinical Procedures in Emergency Medicine 
       Reilley TE, Gerhardt MA. Anesthesia for foot and ankle surgery.  Clin Podiatr Med Surg [Medline] 
       Reilley TE, Terebuh VD, Gerhardt MA. Regional anesthesia techniques for the lower extremity.  Foot Ankle Clin [Medline]

Article 11:

   
     Kaposi Sarcoma Treatment Protocols 
       Kaposi Sarcoma Treatment Protocols: Treatment Protocols 
       Kaposi Sarcoma Treatment Protocols: Treatment Protocols 
       Overview Treatment Protocols 
       Kaposi Sarcoma Treatment Protocols Overview 2006845-overview Oct 15, 2014 2015-08-04-17:30 1 Oncology 2002 Diseases & Conditions Condition 
       1 2 content 2006845 502 3029380 7 ssg 
     Jun 04, 2015 
       condition Diseases & Conditions 
       oncology Oncology 
       oncology_bonesofttissue Bone and Soft Tissue Cancers Because the natural history of Kaposi sarcoma (KS) is variable, assessment of therapy may be difficult. Treatment usually is based on the extent of disease and the patient’s immune status. 0 Kaposi Sarcoma Treatment Protocols 
     Treatment Protocols 
       Because the natural history of Kaposi sarcoma (KS) is variable, assessment of therapy may be difficult. Treatment usually is based on the extent of disease and the patient’s immune status. Optimal therapy for KS and acquired immune deficiency syndrome (KS-AIDS) is yet to be determined. The challenge is to treat KS-AIDS effectively without immunocompromising the patient further—or, better, with reconstitution of the immune system. [ Management of childhood HIV-associated KS in resource-poor settings is challenging. [ 
       General treatment approach See the list below: 
         
           Observation is preferred over beginning treatment for patients with limited asymptomatic lesions 
           Localized nodular disease may respond well to surgical excision, radiotherapy, and intralesional and outpatient low-dose vinblastine chemotherapy  
           The choice of topical therapy depends on the site and extent of the disease and on individual patient status 
           Kaposi sarcoma-associated paradoxical immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (KS-IRIS) in antiretroviral (ART)-naïve HIV-infected patients is a major contributor to KS-associated mortality in Africa. Increased awareness of this entity is important [ 
           In children with both KS and HIV infection in sub-Saharan Africa, ART together with a chemotherapy regimen appears to be better than the use of either ART or chemotherapy alone [ 
       Radiotherapy See the list below: 
         
           Radiotherapy often produces good therapeutic results with classic nodular KS but tends to be only palliative in patients with KS-AIDS  
           In localized nodular KS, conventional radiotherapy is highly effective 
           Electron beam radiation therapy (EBRT) has limited penetration beyond the dermis; it may be a good modality for superficial lesions  
           Deeper or unresponsive KS may be treated with standard non–electron beam radiation therapy or other approaches 
           Initial response to radiotherapy usually is complete or demonstrates marked regression of the nodules; the more extensive the involvement, the less responsive it tends to be  
           Radiotherapy may be more effective on new lesions than on chronic ones and may provide local KS control in patients with KS-AIDS 
           Radioisotope scanning using technetium-99m may detect occult KS infiltration in the subcutaneous and muscular tissues and draining lymph nodes; this allows improved efficiency of large-field radiotherapy  
           Argon laser photocoagulation therapy also may be beneficial in classic KS lesions 
           Low-voltage (100 kV) photon radiation: 8-10 Gy as a single dose or 15-20 Gy over 1wk [ 
           EBRT: 4 Gy once weekly for 6-8wk consecutively [ 
       Chemotherapy See the list below: 
         
           Systemic  vinblastine [ 
           Treatment of classic KS may also be accomplished with topical  imiquimod [ 
           In those with KS-AIDS, highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART), with or without local KS therapy, is employed with interferon alfa if the CD4 cell count is < 200/µL or if it is early in the disease course [ 
           Interferon alfa-2b or 
           Interferon alfa-2b 5-10 million units SC or IM 3 times weekly (total weekly dose, 15-30 million units)  or 
           Interferon alfa-2b 1 million units SC daily or twice weekly (total weekly dose, 2-7 million units) [ 
           In those who have a CD4 cell count < 200/µL or who have advanced KS-AIDS, pegylated liposomal doxorubicin (PLD) 20 mg/m 2 [ 
           Nonresponders are given other cytotoxic agents, such as  paclitaxel 
           Paclitaxel and PLD were compared in a randomized trial that showed comparable response rates, median progression-free survival (PFS), and 2-y survival rates for the 2 agents but somewhat more grade 3-5 toxicity for paclitaxel [ 
           The efficacy of taxanes such as paclitaxel and  docetaxel [ 
           PLD is now being used as a second-line therapy in the treatment of patients with advanced classic KS [ 
           In iatrogenic KS, cessation of immunosuppressive therapy may be the most effective treatment 
           Patients on immunosuppressive therapy—specifically, corticosteroids and cytotoxic drugs—may experience partial or complete regression when therapy is discontinued  
           If possible, immunosuppressive medication doses should be reduced or discontinued before specific therapy for iatrogenic KS is initiated  
           An open label, randomized trial in Malawi that included 92 children (46% of them naïve to ART, 11% of them HIV negative) found that oral etoposide was a safe and effective treatment for containing KS and improving quality of life, compared with either intravenous vincristine or vincristine and bleomycin [ 
       Follow-up and prevention See the list below: 
         
           Reducing the human herpesvirus-8 (HHV-8; or Kaposi sarcoma–associated herpesvirus [KSHV]) infection rate should diminish the incidence of KS  
           Screening transplant recipients for HHV-8 infection may be beneficial 
           Use of  sirolimus [ 
           In comparison with other immunosuppressants—namely, calcineurin inhibitors—sirolimus has the advantage of being associated with a decreased risk of malignancies, including KS; it may also lead to regression of KS  
           Antiviral therapy with  foscarnet 
           Use of HAART appears to reduce the risk of developing new KS significantly [ 
           After treatment is initiated, follow-up care is important to check for recurrence or visceral spread; follow-up care recommendations may include imaging procedures, laboratory tests (eg, complete blood count [CBC], urinalysis, liver function studies) and monitoring of symptoms potentially related to return of cancer  
           Screening for other types of cancers, particularly lymphomas, is important during follow-up 
       Survival data See the list below: 
         
           The clinical KS type (localized nodular disease, locally aggressive disease, or generalized KS) may be the best predictor of prognosis  
           Cutaneous skin testing for anergy has been employed for decades as a good correlate with clinical disease type and prognosis; in addition, the degree of immunosuppression also correlates with clinical type and prognosis [ 
           Localized nodular KS has a favorable prognosis, with few deaths attributable to KS 
           The prognosis is also excellent when iatrogenic KS in transplant recipients shows regression after suitable therapeutic modification; thus, classic KS has long been regarded as a disorder that most immunocompetent people die  with of 
           Locally aggressive KS is not so favorable in prognosis; the African 3-y survival rate of about two thirds, calculated decades ago, remains accurate  
           Generalized KS, the type most common with KS-AIDS, has a 3-y survival rate closer to 0% without therapy, with people dying either of disseminated KS or of an intervening opportunistic infection within 3y of diagnosis, regardless of therapeutic intervention  
           In one African country, the median survival with KS has been < 3.5 mo 
           In HIV-associated advanced KS, median survival is 31 mo (range, 1.8-48 mo) in patients treated with protease inhibitor–based HAART, compared with only 7 mo (range, 1-28 mo) in those not receiving HAART [ 
           Importantly, 81% in the HAART group were alive at 18 mo after the start of chemotherapy, compared with only 12% in the non-HAART group  
           Another analysis documented that when KS does develop in patients on HAART, it exhibits a less aggressive clinical pattern in patients already receiving HAART than in those naive to this treatment, but the natural history and outcome are unaltered [ 
           A 3-y survival rate of 64% with KS-HAART is comparable to the 78% without HAART; median survivals of HIV-infected homosexual men in the good- and poor-risk categories were 27 mo and 15 mo, respectively, for tumor extent; 40 mo and 13 mo for degree of immunosuppression; and 22 mo and 16 mo for HIV-associated systemic disorders, with multivariate analysis indicating that severity of immunosuppression gave the most predictive information [ 
           In one study of KS-AIDS patients, the overall 5-year survival was 92% for those with early-stage KS and 83% for those with advanced-stage KS; for 140 patients with advanced-stage KS treated with combination antiretroviral therapy and liposomal anthracycline chemotherapy, 5-year overall survival was 85% [ 
     
       Author 
         Robert A Schwartz, MD, MPH Professor and Head of Dermatology, Professor of Pathology, Pediatrics, Medicine, and Preventive Medicine and Community Health, Rutgers New Jersey Medical School; Visiting Professor, Rutgers University School of Public Affairs and Administration Robert A Schwartz, MD, MPH is a member of the following medical societies:  Alpha Omega Alpha New York Academy of Medicine American Academy of Dermatology American College of Physicians Sigma Xi Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Pharmacy Editor 
         Jasmeet Anand, PharmD, RPh Adjunct Instructor, University of Nebraska Medical Center College of Pharmacy; Editor-in-Chief, Medscape Drug Reference Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Managing Editor 
         Christopher D Braden, DO Hematologist/Oncologist, Chancellor Center for Oncology at Deaconess Hospital Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Chief Editor 
         Jules E Harris, MD, FACP, FRCPC Clinical Professor of Medicine, Section of Hematology/Oncology, University of Arizona College of Medicine, Arizona Cancer Center Jules E Harris, MD, FACP, FRCPC is a member of the following medical societies:  American Association for the Advancement of Science American Society of Hematology Central Society for Clinical and Translational Research American Society of Clinical Oncology Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
     
       Schwartz RA, Micali G, Nasca MR, Scuderi L. Kaposi sarcoma: a continuing conundrum.  J Am Acad Dermatol [Medline] 
       Krown SE, Metroka C, Wernz JC. Kaposi's sarcoma in the acquired immune deficiency syndrome: a proposal for uniform evaluation, response, and staging criteria. AIDS Clinical Trials Group Oncology Committee.  J Clin Oncol [Medline] 
       Mitsuyasu RT. Clinical variants and staging of Kaposi's sarcoma.  Semin Oncol [Medline] 
       Schwartz RA, Volpe JA, Lambert MW, Lambert WC. aposi’s sarcoma.  Semin Dermatol 
       O'Mahony D, Gandjbakche A, Hassan M, Vogel A, Yarchoan R. Imaging techniques for Kaposi's sarcoma.  J HIV Ther [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Theron S,  Andronikou S,  Du Plessis J,  Goussard P,  George R,  Mapukata A, et al. Pulmonary Kaposi sarcoma in six children.  Pediatr Radiol [Medline] 
       Klein E, Schwartz RA, Laor Y, Milgrom H, Burgess GH, Holtermann OA. Treatment of Kaposi's sarcoma with vinblastine.  Cancer [Medline] 
       Goiriz R, Ríos-Buceta L, De Arriba AG, Aragüés M, García-Diez A. Treatment of classic Kaposi's sarcoma with topical imiquimod.  Dermatol Surg [Medline] 
       Molyneux E,  Davidson A,  Orem J,  Hesseling P,  Balagadde-Kambugu J,  Githanga J, et al. The management of children with Kaposi sarcoma in resource limited settings.  Pediatr Blood Cancer [Medline] 
       Letang E,  Lewis JJ,  Bower M,  Mosam A,  Borok M,  Campbell TB, et al. Immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome associated with kaposi sarcoma: higher incidence and mortality in Africa than in the UK.  AIDS [Medline] 
       Anglemyer A, Agrawal AK, Rutherford GW. Treatment of Kaposi sarcoma in children with HIV-1 infection.  Cochrane Database Syst Rev [Medline] 
       Hamilton CR, Cummings BJ, Harwood AR. Radiotherapy of Kaposi’s sarcoma.  Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 
       Nisce LZ, Safai B, Poussin-Rosillo H. Once weekly total and subtotal skin electron beam therapy for Kaposi’s sarcoma.  Cancer 
       Solan AJ, Greenwald ES, Silvay O. Long-term complete remissions of Kaposi’s sarcoma with vinblastine therapy.  Cancer 
       Célestin Schartz NE, Chevret S, Paz C, et al. Imiquimod 5% cream for treatment of HIV-negative Kaposi’s sarcoma skin lesions: a phase I to II, open-label trial in 17 patients.  J Am Acad Dermatol 
       Hengge UR, Ruzicka T, Stuschke M, Roggendorf M, Schwartz RA, Seeber S. Update on Kaposi’s sarcoma and other HHV8 associated diseases. Part 1: epidemiology, environmental predispositions, clinical manifestations, and therapy.  Lancet Infect Dis 
       Krown SE. Management of Kaposi sarcoma: the role of interferon and thalidomide.  Curr Opin Oncol 
       VonRoenn JH. Clinical presentations and standard therapy of AIDS-associated Kaposi's sarcoma.  Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 
       Northfelt DW, Dezube BJ, Thommes JA, et al. Pegylated-liposomal doxorubicin versus doxorubicin, bleomycin, and vincristine in the treatment of AIDS-related Kaposi’s sarcoma: results of a randomized phase III clinical trial.  J Clin Oncol 
       Cianfrocca M,  Lee S,  Von Roenn J,  Tulpule A,  Dezube BJ,  Aboulafia DM, et al. Randomized trial of paclitaxel versus pegylated liposomal doxorubicin for advanced human immunodeficiency virus-associated Kaposi sarcoma: evidence of symptom palliation from chemotherapy.  Cancer [Medline] 
       Di Lorenzo G,  Di Trolio R,  Montesarchio V,  Palmieri G,  Nappa P,  Delfino M, et al. Pegylated liposomal doxorubicin as second-line therapy in the treatment of patients with advanced classic Kaposi sarcoma: a retrospective study.  Cancer [Medline] 
       Fardet L,  Stoebner PE,  Bachelez H,  Descamps V,  Kerob D,  Meunier L, et al. Treatment with taxanes of refractory or life-threatening Kaposi sarcoma not associated with human immunodeficiency virus infection.  Cancer [Medline] 
       Chagaluka G,  Stanley C,  Banda K,  Depani S,  Nijram'madzi J,  Katangwe T, et al. Kaposi's sarcoma in children: an open randomised trial of vincristine, oral etoposide and a combination of vincristine and bleomycin.  Eur J Cancer [Medline] 
       Paghdal KV, Schwartz RA. Sirolimus (rapamycin): from the soil of Easter Island to a bright future.  J Am Acad Dermatol [Medline] 
       Boratynska M, Watorek E, Smolska D, Patrzalek D, Klinger M. Anticancer effect of sirolimus in renal allograft recipients with de novo malignancies.  Transplant Proc [Medline] 
       Leder HA, Galor A, Peters GB, Kedhar SR, Dunn JP, Thorne JE. Resolution of conjunctival Kaposi sarcoma after institution of highly active antiretroviral therapy alone.  Br J Ophthalmol [Medline] 
       Morgan D, Malamba SS, Orem J, Mayanja B, Okongo M, Whitworth JA. Survival by AIDS defining condition in rural Uganda.  Sex Transm Infect 
       Templeton AC, Bhana D. Prognosis in Kaposi’s sarcoma.  J Natl Cancer Inst 
       Leitch H, Trudeau M, Routy JP. Effect of protease inhibitor-based highly active antiretroviral therapy on survival in HIV-associated advanced Kaposi’s sarcoma patients treated with chemotherapy.  HIV Clin Trials 
       Nasti G, Talamini R, Antinori A, et al. AIDS-related Kaposi’s sarcoma: evaluation of potential new prognostic factors and assessment of the AIDS Clinical Trial Group Staging System in the HAART Era—the Italian Cooperative Group on AIDS and Tumors and the Italian Cohort of Patients Naive From Antiretrovirals.  J Clin Oncol 
       Nasti G, Martellotta F, Berretta M, et al. Impact of highly active antiretroviral therapy on the presenting features and outcome of patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome-related Kaposi sarcoma.  Cancer 
       Lodi S, Guiguet M, Costagliola D, et al. Kaposi sarcoma incidence and survival among HIV-infected homosexual men after HIV seroconversion.  J Natl Cancer Inst 
       Bower M,  Dalla Pria A,  Coyle C,  Andrews E,  Tittle V,  Dhoot S, et al. Prospective stage-stratified approach to AIDS-related Kaposi's sarcoma.  J Clin Oncol [Medline]

Article 12:

   
     Prostate Cancer Treatment Protocols 
       Prostate Cancer Treatment Protocols: Treatment Protocols 
       Prostate Cancer Treatment Protocols: Treatment Protocols 
       Overview Treatment Protocols 
       Prostate Cancer Treatment Protocols Overview 2007095-overview Oct 07, 2014 2015-08-04-17:30 1 Oncology 2002 Diseases & Conditions Condition 
       1 2 content 2007095 502 3003438 7 ssg 
     Jun 04, 2015 
       condition Diseases & Conditions 
       oncology Oncology 
       oncology_genitourinary Genitourinary Cancers Treatment protocols for prostate cancer are provided below, including general treatment recommendations and those for localized prostate cancer, for recurrent disease, and for advanced or metastatic disease. See Prostate Cancer: Diagnosis and Staging, a Critical Images slideshow, to help determine the best diagnostic approach for this potenti... 0 Prostate Cancer Treatment Protocols 
     Treatment Protocols 
       Treatment protocols for prostate cancer are provided below, including general treatment recommendations and those for localized prostate cancer, for recurrent disease, and for advanced or metastatic disease. See  Prostate Cancer: Diagnosis and Staging Also, see the  Advanced Prostate Cancer: Signs of Metastatic Disease 
       General treatment recommendations for prostate cancer Selecting initial treatment requires assessing the risk of the disease spreading or progressing, which is based on evaluating the patient's life expectancy, comorbidities, biopsy grade (Gleason score), clinical stage, and prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level.  
       Treatment recommendations for clinically localized prostate cancer 
         Very low risk of recurrence: 
         
           Patients with clinical stage T1c, Gleason score ≤6, PSA < 10 ng/mL, fewer than three positive prostate cores, ≤50% cancer in each core, and PSA density < 0.15 ng/mL/g, with a life expectancy < 20 y, should be treated with active surveillance; they should also be referred for observation  
           Surveillance includes periodic PSA, prostate exam, and prostate biopsy 
           Optimal protocol for surveillance is still unknown [ [ 
           For treatment recommendations for patients with a life expectancy ≥20 y, see initial therapy for Low Risk of Recurrence, below  
         Low risk of recurrence: 
         
           Treatment for patients with clinical stage T1-T2a, Gleason score 2-6, PSA < 10 ng/mL, with a life expectancy < 10 y, includes active surveillance  
           Treatment for patients with a life expectancy ≥10y includes active surveillance  OR 
           Radical prostatectomy (RP) with or without pelvic lymph node dissection (PLND) if predicted probability of lymph node metastases ≥2%; RP is the standard therapy for localized prostate cancer, involving the removal of the prostate and seminal vesicles with or without pelvic lymph nodes; this may be done using either open or laparoscopic (robotic-assisted) technique [ OR 
           Radiation therapy is a standard therapy for patients with localized disease, and 3-dimensional (3D) techniques such as 3D conformal radiation treatment (3D-CRT), which offer benefits such as reduced toxicity and the use of higher doses; second-generation techniques, including intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT), are also required, especially if doses ≥78 Gy are administered [ 
           Radiation therapy doses of 75.6-79 Gy in conventional 36-41 Gy fractions to the prostate [ [ 
           Patients with low-risk cancer are not candidates for pelvic lymph node irradiation or androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) [ 
         Intermediate risk of recurrence: 
         
           Treatment options for patients with clinical stage T2b-T2c, Gleason score 7, PSA 10-20 ng/mL, who have a life expectancy < 10 y, include active surveillance  OR 
           Radiation therapy (doses of 78-80+ Gy) with 3D-CRT/IMRT with daily IGRT with or without short-term neoadjuvant/concomitant/adjuvant ADT for 4-6 mo with or without brachytherapy (recommended dose rate: 145 Gy for iodine-125 and 125 Gy for palladium-103) [ 
           Treatment recommendations for patients with a life expectancy ≥10 y include RP with PLND if predicted probability of lymph node metastasis ≥2%  OR 
           Radiation therapy (doses of 78-80+ Gy) with 3D-CRT/IMRT with daily IGRT with or without short-term neoadjuvant/concomitant/adjuvant ADT for 4-6 mo with or without brachytherapy (recommended dose rate: 145 Gy for iodine-125 and 125 Gy for palladium-103)  
           Intermediate-risk cancers consider combining brachytherapy (recommended dose rate: 145 Gy for iodine-125 and 125 Gy for palladium-103) with external beam radiation therapy (EBRT)(40-50 Gy) with or without 4-6 mo neoadjuvant/concomitant/adjuvant ADT  
           Administering ADT before, during, and after radiation prolongs survival 
         High risk of recurrence: 
         
           Clinical stage T3a, Gleason score 8-10, PSA >20 ng/mL 
           Treatment options include radiation therapy (doses of 78-80+ Gy) with 3D-CRT/IMRT plus long-term neoadjuvant/concomitant/adjuvant ADT for 2-3 y  OR 
           Radiation therapy (doses of 78-80+ Gy) with 3D-CRT/IMRT with daily IGRT plus brachytherapy (recommended dose rate: 145 Gy for iodine-125 and 125 Gy for palladium-103) with or without short-term neoadjuvant/concomitant/adjuvant ADT for 4-6 mo  OR 
           RP plus PLND for selected patients with no fixation 
           High-risk cancers may be treated with combination EBRT (40-50 Gy) and brachytherapy with or without 4-6 mo neoadjuvant/concomitant/adjuvant ADT  
       Alternative treatment recommendations for localized prostate cancer Other treatments that have been used in the initial management of localized prostate cancer include the following: 
         
           Cryotherapy 
           High-intensity focused ultrasound 
           Particle beam therapy 
         Cryotherapy: 
         
           Cryotherapy (also known as cryosurgery or cryoablation) involves using transrectal ultrasonographic guidance; percutaneous cryoprobes are placed and used to freeze prostate tissue  
           This treatment is not optimal but may be used in select patients with localized prostate cancer or as focal therapy in low-risk patients (experimental) [ 
           Can also be considered as salvage therapy after failed radiation therapy [ 
           Complications include tissue sloughing, perineal ecchymosis, stricture or contracture, incontinence, impotence, and fistula formation between the urinary and gastrointestinal tracts  
         High-intensity focused ultrasound: 
         
           Acoustic ablative technique that uses ultrasound to destroy prostate tissue 
           Not yet FDA approved in the United States, pending multicenter trials 
         Particle beam therapy: 
         
           Similar to radiation therapy but uses protons for energy; however, long-term follow-up data on this technique are lacking 
       Biochemical failure See the list below: 
         
           Approximately 50% of patients treated with intent for cure will have biochemical recurrence, which most commonly manifests as a rising PSA level [ 
           Biopsy of the prostatic bed is usually not recommended unless the patient is a candidate for salvage therapy 
       Post–radical prostatectomy recurrence See the list below: 
         
           Defined as a detectable PSA that increases on two subsequent measurements or a PSA that fails to fall to undetectable levels 
           Best PSA threshold unknown but probably between 0.2 and 0.4 ng/mL [ 
           Treatment options include salvage radiation therapy, androgen deprivation, and surveillance 
           Adjuvant radiation therapy may be more beneficial than salvage radiation therapy in men with poor pathologic features [ 
       Post–radiation therapy recurrence See the list below: 
         
           Defined as a rise in PSA of 2 ng/ml or more above the nadir [ 
           PSA can bounce up and down after radiation 
           Treatment options include salvage prostatectomy, ADT, surveillance, high-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU) (trials), cryotherapy, repeat irradiation  
       Treatment recommendations for locally advanced prostate cancer 
         Very high risk: 
         
           Clinical stage T3b-T4 treatment options include radiation therapy (doses of 78-80+ Gy) with 3D-CRT/IMRT plus long-term neoadjuvant/concomitant/adjuvant androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) for 2-3 y  OR 
           Radiation therapy (doses of 78-80+ Gy) with 3D-CRT/IMRT with daily IGRT plus brachytherapy with or without short-term neoadjuvant/concomitant/ADT for 4-6 mo  OR 
           RP plus PLND for selected patients with no fixation  OR 
           ADT in selected patients 
         Metastatic disease: 
         
           Any T, N1: Treatment includes ADT  or 
           Any T, any N, M1: Treatment includes only ADT for patients with M1 
       Androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) recommendations for advanced or metastatic disease See the list below: 
         
           ADT is the preferred initial treatment for symptomatic metastatic prostate cancer because androgenic effects promote the growth and malignant transformation of prostatic tissue [ 
           ADTs include luteinizing hormone (LH) receptor agonists (eg, histrelin, leuprolide), gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) receptor agonists (eg, goserelin, histrelin, leuprolide, triptorelin) and antagonists (eg, degarelix), and complete androgen blockade (CAB)  
           CAB includes medical or surgical castration with an oral antiandrogen (eg, bicalutamide, flutamide, nilutamide) [ 
           Patients who do not show an adequate suppression of serum testosterone (< 50 ng/dL) may be considered for CAB 
           Monotherapy with nonsteroidal antiandrogens is less effective but these agents are associated with fewer hot flashes and fatigue and do not impair libido  
           If hormone therapy fails, that therapy should be continued into and through the next hormone manipulation 
         Gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonists: 
         
           Therapy with GnRH analogs may induce medical castration by suppressing luteinizing hormone (LH) production 
           These agonists can potentially cause a transient surge of LH when therapy is initiated before the LH levels fall (flare phenomenon) 
           GnRH agonists are offered in 1 mo, 3 mo, and once-yearly depots; premedication with antiandrogen is necessary to prevent flare phenomenon  
           Leuprolide or or or OR 
           Histrelin [ OR 
           Goserelin or [ OR 
           Triptorelin or or 
         Gonadotropin-releasing hormone antagonists: Pure GnRH antagonists suppress testosterone and avoid the flare phenomenon associated with GnRH agonists. 
         
           Degarelix then 
         Nonsteroidal antiandrogens: 
         
           Antiandrogens bind to androgen receptors and competitively inhibit their interaction with testosterone and dihydrotestosterone 
           These agents do not decrease LH levels and androgen production 
           Antiandrogens are usually used in combination with a GnRH agonist, to prevent a disease flare caused by the transient increase in testosterone levels  
           Flutamide OR 
           Bicalutamide OR 
           Nilutamide then OR 
           Enzalutamide 160 mg PO daily 
         Hormone-refractory prostate cancer: 
         
           Taxanes alone or in combination with other agents have demonstrated efficacy in the treatment of hormone-refractory prostate cancer  
           Recommended dose is  paclitaxel 2 OR 
           Paclitaxel 150 mg/m 2 
       Management of castration-recurrent prostate cancer See the list below: 
         
           All patients with metastatic disease become resistant to ADT 
           The median time to symptomatic progression after a rise in PSA level of more than 4 ng/mL is approximately 6-8 mo, with a median time to death of 12-18 mo  
           Symptomatic patients have a median survival of 1 y 
           Radiation may be used for palliation in patients with painful bone metastases or impending spinal cord compression 
           Surgical intervention may be necessary for weight-bearing bones involved in pathologic fracture 
           Therapeutic options are limited, and the focus is on improving quality of life using single or multimodal therapies 
           Docetaxel every 3 wk plus prednisone is the treatment of choice for men with symptomatic castration-recurrent prostate cancer; [ docetaxel 2 plus prednisone 
           Symptomatic men who are not candidates for docetaxel-based regimens may be candidates for  mitoxantrone 2 plus [ 
           Men with less advanced disease, good performance status, life expectancy >6 mo, no visceral disease, and no or minimal symptoms and who are resistant to standard hormone treatment may be candidates for autologous immunotherapy with sipuleucel-T [ 
           Sipuleucel-T acetaminophen [ 
           Abiraterone [ Treatment recommendations for late-stage castration-resistant prostate cancer with prior docetaxel chemotherapy [ 
         
           Abiraterone has been approved for the treatment of patients with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer who are either chemotherapy-naive or those who have had prior docetaxel therapy; recommended dose is 1000 mg PO once daily  plus [ [ 
           Alternative regimens include cabazitaxel with prednisone for patients who have hormone-refractory metastatic prostate cancer that was previously treated with a docetaxel-containing treatment regimen;  cabazitaxel 2 plus 2 
           Enzalutamide 
       Treatment recommendations for patients with castration-recurrent prostate cancer and bone metastases See the list below: 
         
           Bisphosphonates are recommended for all men with hormone-refractory prostate cancer and bone metastases [ 
           Bisphosphonates have been shown to reduce skeleton-related events such as pathologic fracture 
           Zoledronic acid OR 
           Alendronate OR 
           Denosumab The radiopharmaceutical radium-223 dichloride (Xofigo) was approved in May 2013 for men with castration-resistant prostate cancer with symptomatic bone metastases and no known visceral metastatic disease. [ 
         
           50 kBq (1.36 microcurie) per kg IV infused over 1 minute; repeat q 4 wk for six cycles total; dosage calculation must be based on decay correction factor of radium-223 (listed in prescribing information)  
     
       Author 
         Reza Ghavamian, MD Professor of Clinical Urology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine; Director of Urologic Oncology, Director of Minimally Invasive and Robotic Urologic Surgery, Montefiore Medical Center Reza Ghavamian, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American Urological Association Society of Urologic Oncology Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Pharmacy Editor 
         Mary L Windle, PharmD Adjunct Associate Professor, University of Nebraska Medical Center College of Pharmacy; Editor-in-Chief, Medscape Drug Reference Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Managing Editor 
         Christopher D Braden, DO Hematologist/Oncologist, Chancellor Center for Oncology at Deaconess Hospital Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Chief Editor 
         Jules E Harris, MD, FACP, FRCPC Clinical Professor of Medicine, Section of Hematology/Oncology, University of Arizona College of Medicine, Arizona Cancer Center Jules E Harris, MD, FACP, FRCPC is a member of the following medical societies:  American Association for the Advancement of Science American Society of Hematology Central Society for Clinical and Translational Research American Society of Clinical Oncology Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
     
       Cagiannos I, Karakiewicz P, Eastham JA, et al. A preoperative nomogram identifying decreased risk of positive pelvic lymph nodes in patients with prostate cancer.  J Urol [Medline] 
       Heidenreich A, Ohlmann CH, Polyakov S. Anatomical extent of pelvic lymphadenectomy in patients undergoing radical prostatectomy.  Eur Urol [Medline] 
       Hu JC,  Gu X,  Lipsitz SR,  Barry MJ,  D'Amico AV,  Weinberg AC, et al. Comparative effectiveness of minimally invasive vs open radical prostatectomy.  JAMA [Medline] 
       Carter HB, Kettermann A, Warlick C, et al. Expectant management of prostate cancer with curative intent: an update of the Johns Hopkins experience.  J Urol [Medline] 
       Choo R, Klotz L, Danjoux C, Morton GC, et al. Feasibility study: watchful waiting for localized low to intermediate grade prostate carcinoma with selective delayed intervention based on prostate specific antigen, histological and/or clinical progression.  J Urol [Medline] 
       O'Brien MF, Cronin AM, Fearn PA, et al. Pretreatment prostate-specific antigen (PSA) velocity and doubling time are associated with outcome but neither improves prediction of outcome beyond pretreatment PSA alone in patients treated with radical prostatectomy.  J Clin Oncol [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Albertsen PC, Hanley JA, Fine J. 20-year outcomes following conservative management of clinically localized prostate cancer.  JAMA [Medline] 
       Albertsen PC, Hanley JA, Gleason DF, Barry MJ. Competing risk analysis of men aged 55 to 74 years at diagnosis managed conservatively for clinically localized prostate cancer.  JAMA [Medline] 
       Kuban DA, Tucker SL, Dong L, et al. Long-term results of the M. D. Anderson randomized dose-escalation trial for prostate cancer.  Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys [Medline] 
       Stief P, Behrendt A, Lavik G, De Beer D. Combined gel probe and isotope labeling technique for measuring dissimilatory nitrate reduction to ammonium in sediments at millimeter-level resolution.  Appl Environ Microbiol [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Lu-Yao GL, Albertsen PC, Moore DF, et al. Survival following primary androgen deprivation therapy among men with localized prostate cancer.  JAMA [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Bolla M, Collette L, Blank L, et al. Long-term results with immediate androgen suppression and external irradiation in patients with locally advanced prostate cancer (an EORTC study): a phase III randomised trial.  Lancet [Medline] 
       Merrick GS, Butler WM, Wallner KE, Galbreath RW, Adamovich E. Permanent interstitial brachytherapy in younger patients with clinically organ-confined prostate cancer.  Urology [Medline] 
       Babaian RJ, Donnelly B, Bahn D, et al. Best practice statement on cryosurgery for the treatment of localized prostate cancer.  J Urol [Medline] 
       Ismail M, Ahmed S, Kastner C, Davies J. Salvage cryotherapy for recurrent prostate cancer after radiation failure: a prospective case series of the first 100 patients.  BJU Int [Medline] 
       Freedland SJ, Moul JW. Prostate specific antigen recurrence after definitive therapy.  J Urol [Medline] 
       Amling CL, Bergstralh EJ, Blute ML, Slezak JM, Zincke H. Defining prostate specific antigen progression after radical prostatectomy: what is the most appropriate cut point?.  J Urol [Medline] 
       Wiegel T, Bottke D, Steiner U, et al. Phase III postoperative adjuvant radiotherapy after radical prostatectomy compared with radical prostatectomy alone in pT3 prostate cancer with postoperative undetectable prostate-specific antigen: ARO 96-02/AUO AP 09/95.  J Clin Oncol [Medline] 
       Van der Kwast TH, Bolla M, Van Poppel H, et al. Identification of patients with prostate cancer who benefit from immediate postoperative radiotherapy: EORTC 22911.  J Clin Oncol [Medline] 
       Roach M 3rd, Hanks G, Thames H Jr, et al. Defining biochemical failure following radiotherapy with or without hormonal therapy in men with clinically localized prostate cancer: recommendations of the RTOG-ASTRO Phoenix Consensus Conference.  Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys [Medline] 
       Loblaw DA, Virgo KS, Nam R, et al. Initial hormonal management of androgen-sensitive metastatic, recurrent, or progressive prostate cancer: 2006 update of an American Society of Clinical Oncology practice guideline.  J Clin Oncol [Medline] 
       Prostate Cancer Trialists Collaborative Group. Maximum androgen blockade in advanced prostate cancer: an overview of the randomised trials. Prostate Cancer Trialists' Collaborative Group.  Lancet [Medline] 
       Terk MD, Stock RG, Stone NN. Identification of patients at increased risk for prolonged urinary retention following radioactive seed implantation of the prostate.  J Urol [Medline] 
       Petrylak DP, Tangen CM, Hussain MH, et al. Docetaxel and estramustine compared with mitoxantrone and prednisone for advanced refractory prostate cancer.  N Engl J Med [Medline] 
       Tannock IF, de Wit R, Berry WR, Horti J, Pluzanska A, Chi KN. Docetaxel plus prednisone or mitoxantrone plus prednisone for advanced prostate cancer.  N Engl J Med [Medline] 
       Berthold DR, Pond GR, Soban F, de Wit R, Eisenberger M, Tannock IF. Docetaxel plus prednisone or mitoxantrone plus prednisone for advanced prostate cancer: updated survival in the TAX 327 study.  J Clin Oncol [Medline] 
       Kantoff PW, Higano CS, Shore ND, et al. Sipuleucel-T immunotherapy for castration-resistant prostate cancer.  N Engl J Med [Medline] 
       Small EJ, Schellhammer PF, Higano CS, et al. Placebo-controlled phase III trial of immunologic therapy with sipuleucel-T (APC8015) in patients with metastatic, asymptomatic hormone refractory prostate cancer.  J Clin Oncol [Medline] 
       Attard G, Reid AH, de Bono JS. Abiraterone acetate is well tolerated without concomitant use of corticosteroids.  J Clin Oncol [Medline] 
       Salem M, Garcia JA. Abiraterone acetate, a novel adrenal inhibitor in metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer.  Curr Oncol Rep [Medline] 
       Ryan CJ, Smith MR, De Bono JS, Molina A, Logothetis C, De Souza PL, et al. Interim analysis results of COU-AA-302, a randomized, phase III study of abiraterone acetate in chemotherapy-naïve patients with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer. Presented at the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) 2012 Annual Meeting.  June 1-5, 2012, Chicago, IL.  [Full Text] 
       US Food and Drug Administration (FDA). FDA expands Zytiga’s use for late-stage prostate cancer – drug can now be used before treatment with chemotherapy. December 10, 2012. Available at  http://www.fda.gov/NewsEvents/Newsroom/PressAnnouncements/ucm331492.htm 
       Haverkort MA, van de Kamer JB, Pieters BR, et al. Position verification for the prostate: effect on rectal wall dose.  Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys [Medline] 
       Saad F, Gleason DM, Murray R, et al. A randomized, placebo-controlled trial of zoledronic acid in patients with hormone-refractory metastatic prostate carcinoma.  J Natl Cancer Inst [Medline] 
       NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology: Prostate Cancer. Version 1.2014. Available at  http://www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/prostate.pdf 
       Parker C, Heinrich D, O’Sullivan JM, et al. Overall survival benefit and safety profile of radium-223 chloride, a first-in-class alpha-pharmaceutical: results from a phase III randomized trial (ALSYMPCA) in patients with castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) with bone metastases. J Clin Oncol. 2012; 30 (supp 5). Abstract 8. 

Article 13:

   
     Breast Cancer Staging 
       Breast Cancer Staging: TNM Classification for Breast Cancer 
       Breast Cancer Staging: TNM Classification for Breast Cancer 
       Overview TNM Classification for Breast Cancer 
       Breast Cancer Staging Overview 2007112-overview Sep 06, 2013 2015-08-04-17:30 1 Oncology 2002 Diseases & Conditions Condition 
       1 2 content 2007112 502 840 7 ssg 
     Jun 04, 2015 
       condition Diseases & Conditions 
       oncology Oncology 
       oncology_breast Breast Cancer The TNM classification for staging of breast cancer is provided below. 
 Table. 0 Breast Cancer Staging 
     TNM Classification for Breast Cancer 
       The TNM classification for staging of breast cancer is provided below. [ 
         Table. TNM Classification for Breast Cancer 
           
             
               
                 Primary tumor (T) 
             
               TX 
               Primary tumor cannot be assessed 
             
               T0 
               No evidence of primary tumor 
             
               Tis 
               Carcinoma in situ 
             
               Tis (DCIS) 
               Ductal carcinoma in situ 
             
               Tis (LCIS) 
               Lobular carcinoma in situ 
             
               Tis (Paget) 
               Paget disease of the nipple NOT associated with invasive carcinoma and/or carcinoma in situ (DCIS and/or LCIS) in the underlying breast parenchyma. Carcinomas in the breast parenchyma associated with Paget disease are categorized based on the size and characteristics of the parenchymal disease, although the presence of Paget disease should still be noted  
             
               T1 
               Tumor ≤ 20 mm in greatest dimension 
             
               T1mi 
               Tumor ≤ 1 mm in greatest dimension 
             
               T1a 
               Tumor > 1 mm but ≤ 5 mm in greatest dimension 
             
               T1b 
               Tumor > 5 mm but ≤ 10 mm in greatest dimension 
             
               T1c 
               Tumor > 10 mm but ≤ 20 mm in greatest dimension 
             
               T2 
               Tumor > 20 mm but ≤ 50 mm in greatest dimension 
             
               T3 
               Tumor > 50 mm in greatest dimension 
             
               T4 
               Tumor of any size with direct extension to the chest wall and/or to the skin (ulceration or skin nodules) 
             
               T4a 
               Extension to chest wall, not including only pectoralis muscle adherence/invasion 
             
               T4b 
               Ulceration and/or ipsilateral satellite nodules and/or edema (including peau d’orange) of the skin, which do not meet the criteria for inflammatory carcinoma  
             
               T4c 
               Both T4a and T4b 
             
               T4d 
               Inflammatory carcinoma 
             
               
                 Regional lymph nodes (N) 
             
               
                 Clinical 
             
               NX 
               Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed (eg, previously removed) 
             
               N0 
               No regional lymph node metastasis 
             
               N1 
               Metastasis to movable ipsilateral level I, II axillary lymph node(s) 
             
               N2 
               Metastases in ipsilateral level I, II axillary lymph nodes that are clinically fixed or matted or in clinically detected* ipsilateral internal mammary nodes in the  absence 
             
               N2a 
               Metastases in ipsilateral level I, II axillary lymph nodes fixed to one another (matted) or to other structures 
             
               N2b 
               Metastases only in clinically detected* ipsilateral internal mammary nodes and in the  absence 
             
               N3 
               Metastases in ipsilateral infraclavicular (level III axillary) lymph node(s), with or without level I, II axillary node involvement, or in clinically detected  * presence 
             
               N3a 
               Metastasis in ipsilateral infraclavicular lymph node(s) 
             
               N3b 
               Metastasis in ipsilateral internal mammary lymph node(s) and axillary lymph node(s) 
             
               N3c 
               Metastasis in ipsilateral supraclavicular lymph node(s) 
             
               *"Clinically detected" is defined as detected by imaging studies (excluding lymphoscintigraphy) or by clinical examination and having characteristics highly suspicious for malignancy or a presumed pathologic macrometastasis on the basis of fine-needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy with cytologic examination.  
             
               
                 Pathologic (pN)* 
             
               pNX 
               Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed (for example, previously removed, or not removed for pathologic study) 
             
               pN0 
               No regional lymph node metastasis identified histologically.  Note: 
             
               pN0(i-) 
               No regional lymph node metastases histologically, negative IHC 
             
               pN0(i+) 
               Malignant cells in regional lymph node(s) ≤ 0.2 mm (detected by hematoxylin-eosin [H&E] stain or IHC, including ITC)  
             
               pN0(mol-) 
               No regional lymph node metastases histologically, negative molecular findings (reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction [RT-PCR])  
             
               pN0(mol+) 
               Positive molecular findings (RT-PCR) but no regional lymph node metastases detected by histology or IHC 
             
               pN1 
               Micrometastases; or metastases in 1-3 axillary lymph nodes and/or in internal mammary nodes, with metastases detected by sentinel lymph node biopsy but not clinically detected†  
             
               pN1mi 
               Micrometastases (> 0.2 mm and/or > 200 cells, but none > 2.0 mm) 
             
               pN1a 
               Metastases in 1-3 axillary lymph nodes (at least 1 metastasis > 2.0 mm) 
             
               pN1b 
               Metastases in internal mammary nodes, with micrometastases or macrometastases detected by sentinel lymph node biopsy but not clinically detected†  
             
               pN1c 
               Metastases in 1-3 axillary lymph nodes and in internal mammary lymph nodes, with micrometastases or macrometastases detected by sentinel lymph node biopsy but not clinically detected†  
             
               pN2 
               Metastases in 4-9 axillary lymph nodes or in clinically detected‡ internal mammary lymph nodes in the absence of axillary lymph node metastases  
             
               pN2a 
               Metastases in 4-9 axillary lymph nodes (at least 1 tumor deposit > 2.0 mm) 
             
               pN2b 
               Metastases in clinically detected‡ internal mammary lymph nodes in the absence of axillary lymph node metastases 
             
               pN3 
               Metastases in ≥ 10 axillary lymph nodes; or in infraclavicular (level III axillary) lymph nodes; or in clinically detected‡ ipsilateral internal mammary lymph nodes in the presence of ≥ 1 positive level I, II axillary lymph nodes; or in > 3 axillary lymph nodes and in internal mammary lymph nodes, with micrometastases or macrometastases detected by sentinel lymph node biopsy but not clinically detected†; or in ipsilateral supraclavicular lymph nodes  
             
               pN3a 
               Metastases in ≥ 10 axillary lymph nodes (at least 1 tumor deposit > 2.0 mm); or metastases to the infraclavicular (level III axillary lymph) nodes  
             
               pN3b 
               Metastases in clinically detected‡ ipsilateral internal mammary lymph nodes in the presence of ≥ 1 positive axillary lymph nodes; or in > 3 axillary lymph nodes and in internal mammary lymph nodes, with micrometastases or macrometastases detected by sentinel lymph node biopsy but not clinically detected†  
             
               pN3c 
               Metastases in ipsilateral supraclavicular lymph nodes 
             
               *Classification is based on axillary lymph node dissection, with or without sentinel lymph node biopsy. Classification based solely on sentinel lymph node biopsy without subsequent axillary lymph node dissection is designated (sn) for "sentinel node"—for example, pN0(sn). † "Not clinically detected" is defined as not detected by imaging studies (excluding lymphoscintigraphy) or not detected by clinical examination. ‡ "Clinically detected" is defined as detected by imaging studies (excluding lymphoscintigraphy) or by clinical examination and having characteristics highly suspicious for malignancy or a presumed pathologic macrometastasis on the basis of FNA biopsy with cytologic examination.  
             
               
                 Distant metastasis (M) 
             
               M0 
               No clinical or radiographic evidence of distant metastasis 
             
               cM0(i+) 
               No clinical or radiographic evidence of distant metastases, but deposits of molecularly or microscopically detected tumor cells in circulating blood, bone marrow, or other nonregional nodal tissue that are no larger than 0.2 mm in a patient without symptoms or signs of metastases  
             
               M1 
               Distant detectable metastases as determined by classic clinical and radiographic means and/or histologically proven > 0.2 mm  
         Table. Histologic grade 
           
             
               
                 Histologic grade (G) 
             
               GX 
               Grade cannot be assessed 
             
               G1 
               Low combined histologic grade (favorable) 
             
               G2 
               Intermediate combined histologic grade (moderately favorable) 
             
               G3 
               High combined histologic grade (unfavorable) 
         Table. Anatomic stage/prognostic groups 
           
             
               
                 Stage 
               
                 T 
               
                 N 
               
                 M 
             
               0 
               Tis 
               N0 
               M0 
             
               IA 
               T1 
               N0 
               M0 
             
               IB 
               T0 
               N1mi 
               M0 
             
                 
               T1 
               N1mi 
               M0 
             
               IIA 
               T0 
               N1 
               M0 
             
                 
               T1 
               N1 
               M0 
             
                 
               T2 
               N0 
               M0 
             
               IIB 
               T2 
               N1 
               M0 
             
                 
               T3 
               N0 
               M0 
             
               IIIA 
               T0 
               N2 
               M0 
             
                 
               T1 
               N2 
               M0 
             
                 
               T2 
               N2 
               M0 
             
                 
               T3 
               N1 
               M0 
             
                 
               T3 
               N2 
               M0 
             
               IIIB 
               T4 
               N0 
               M0 
             
                 
               T4 
               N1 
               M0 
             
                 
               T4 
               N2 
               M0 
             
               IIIC 
               Any T 
               N3 
               M0 
             
               IV 
               Any T 
               Any N 
               M1 
     
       Author 
         Joseph A Sparano, MD, MD Joseph A Sparano, MD, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American Association for Cancer Research American College of Physicians American Society of Hematology Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Pharmacy Editor 
         Mary L Windle, PharmD Adjunct Associate Professor, University of Nebraska Medical Center College of Pharmacy; Editor-in-Chief, Medscape Drug Reference Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Managing Editor 
         Christopher D Braden, DO Hematologist/Oncologist, Chancellor Center for Oncology at Deaconess Hospital Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Chief Editor 
         Jules E Harris, MD, FACP, FRCPC Clinical Professor of Medicine, Section of Hematology/Oncology, University of Arizona College of Medicine, Arizona Cancer Center Jules E Harris, MD, FACP, FRCPC is a member of the following medical societies:  American Association for the Advancement of Science American Society of Hematology Central Society for Clinical and Translational Research American Society of Clinical Oncology Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
     
       NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology: Breast Cancer. V 3.2013. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. Available at  http://bit.ly/jOuSUf

Article 14:

   
     Malaria Organism-Specific Therapy 
       Malaria Organism-Specific Therapy: Specific Organisms and Therapeutic Regimens 
       Malaria Organism-Specific Therapy: Specific Organisms and Therapeutic Regimens 
       Overview Specific Organisms and Therapeutic Regimens 
       Malaria Organism-Specific Therapy Overview 2015022-overview Jan 08, 2015 2015-06-05-21:01 1 Infectious Diseases 2002 Diseases & Conditions Condition 
       1 2 content 2015022 502 5005294 3 ssg 
     Jun 04, 2015 
       condition Diseases & Conditions 
       infectious_diseases Infectious Diseases 
       infectious_diseases_parasitic Parasitic Infections All efforts should be made to confirm the diagnosis of malaria and to identify the species. Diagnosis is generally via Giemsa-stained thick and thin peripheral blood smears. 0 Malaria Organism-Specific Therapy 
     Specific Organisms and Therapeutic Regimens 
       All efforts should be made to confirm the diagnosis of malaria and to identify the species. Diagnosis is generally via Giemsa-stained thick and thin peripheral blood smears. Multiple other antibody-based rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) are also available. Complications of  Plasmodium falciparum [ The choice of therapeutic regimen is dependent on regional resistance patterns, the most likely species involved, and the clinical condition of the patients, as well as on complicating factors such as altered mental state and pregnancy.  
         
           If treatment must be initiated before the species is known, treat for  P falciparum 
           P falciparum 
           Primaquine should be given if  Plasmodium vivax Plasmodium ovale 
       Resistance patterns Chloroquine-resistant P falciparum [ 
         
           Eastern Hemisphere: All of sub-Saharan Africa, Saudi Arabia, Yemen, Iran, Pakistan, Afghanistan, China, Nepal, and all of Southeast Asia  
           Western Hemisphere: Panama, Haiti, Brazil, Peru, Bolivia, Colombia, Venezuela, Ecuador, French Guiana, Guyana, and Suriname Chloroquine-sensitive P falciparum [ 
         
           Eastern Hemisphere: Turkey, Iraq, Syria, Georgia, Azerbaijan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Kyrgyzstan 
           Western Hemisphere: Argentina, Paraguay, Mexico, Guatemala, Costa Rica, Honduras, Nicaragua, El Salvador, and Dominican Republic Mefloquine-resistant P falciparum [ 
         
           Southeast Asia: Regions of Vietnam, Laos, Thailand, Burma, and Cambodia Chloroquine-resistant P vivax [ 
         
           Papua New Guinea and Indonesia 
       Uncomplicated P falciparum infection See the list below: 
         
           Artemether-lumefantrine or 
           Atovaquone-proguanil or 
           Quinine plus doxycycline or 
           Mefloquine [ 
       Uncomplicated Plasmodium malariae, Plasmodium knowlesi, or chloroquine-sensitive P falciparum infection See the list below: 
         
           Chloroquine phosphate or 
           Hydroxychloroquine [ 
       Uncomplicated P vivax or P ovale infection, expected to be chloroquine-susceptible See the list below: 
         
           Chloroquine phosphate 1000 mg (10 mg/kg base) PO as initial dose, then 300 mg (5 mg/kg) at 6h, 24h, and 48h  plus primaquine or 
           Hydroxychloroquine 800 mg PO as initial dose, then 400 mg PO at 6h, 24h, and 48h  plus [ 
       Uncomplicated P vivax infection, expected to be chloroquine-resistant See the list below: 
         
           Quinine 650 mg PO TID for 3d (7d if malaria was acquired in southern Asia)  plus plus or 
           Atovaquone-proguanil 1000/400 mg PO q24h for 3d (pediatric dosing as for uncomplicated  P falciparum plus or 
           Mefloquine 1250 PO once as a single dose (may give 750 mg PO as initial dose, then 500 mg PO 6-12h later)  plus or 
           Amodiaquine 10 mg/kg PO q24h for 3d (not available in the United States)  plus [ 
       Complicated malaria 
         Preferred treatment, United States: 
         
           Quinidine gluconate 
           Once parasitemia is < 1% and patient can take oral medication, switch to quinine 650 mg PO TID to complete 3-d course (7-d course if malaria was acquired in southern Asia)  
           In addition, give doxycycline 100 mg IV or PO BID for 7d; for pregnant women, instead of doxycycline, give  clindamycin 
         Investigational treatment, United States (available in many countries) [ : 
         
           Artesunate plus 
           Atovaquone-proguanil 1000/400 mg PO q24h for 3d (pediatric dosing as for uncomplicated  P falciparum or or or [ 
       Chemoprophylaxis options Atovaquone-proguanil [ 
         
           Atovaquone-proguanil 1 tablet/day PO can be used as prophylaxis in all areas 
           Begin 1-2d before travel to malarial areas; discontinue 7d after departure from malarial areas 
           Not recommended for prophylaxis if creatinine clearance < 30 mL/min 
           Atovaquone-proguanil should be taken with food or a milky drink Chloroquine phosphate [ 
         
           Chloroquine phosphate 300 mg base (500 mg salt) PO once weekly should be used as prophylaxis only in areas with chloroquine-sensitive malaria  
           Begin 1-2wk before travel to malarial areas; discontinue 4wk after departure from malarial areas Doxycycline [ 
         
           Doxycycline 100 mg/day PO can be used as prophylaxis in all areas 
           Begin 1-2d before travel to malarial areas; discontinue 4wk after departure from malarial areas 
           Contraindicated in children < 8y and in pregnant women 
           Significant risk for photosensitivity Mefloquine [ 
         
           Mefloquine 250 mg PO once weekly can be used as prophylaxis in areas with mefloquine-sensitive malaria 
           Begin 1-2wk before travel to malarial areas; discontinue 4wk after departure from malarial areas 
           Contraindicated in persons with active or recent history of depression, generalized anxiety disorder, psychosis, schizophrenia, or seizures [ 
           Prolongs QT interval; not recommended for persons with cardiac conduction abnormalities [ Primaquine [ 
         
           Primaquine 30 mg base/day PO can be used as prophylaxis for short-duration travel to areas with > 90%  P vivax 
           Begin 1-2d before travel to malarial areas; discontinue 7d after departure from malarial areas 
           Contraindicated in persons with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency (all persons who take primaquine should have a documented normal G6PD level before starting)  
           Also contraindicated during pregnancy and lactation unless the infant being breastfed has a documented normal G6PD level 
       Special considerations See the list below: 
         
           To enroll a patient with severe malaria in the artesunate treatment protocol, contact the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Malaria Hotline at 770-488-7788 during business hours (Mon-Fri; 8:00 am to 4:30 pm, Eastern time); after hours, call 770-488-7100 and ask to speak with a CDC Malaria Branch clinician  
           Quinidine may cause QT prolongation or hypoglycemia; electrocardiography and serum glucose monitoring are required 
           Patients prescribed primaquine should be checked for the presence of G6PD deficiency 
     
       Author 
         Joseph U Becker, MD Fellow, Global Health and International Emergency Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine Joseph U Becker, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American College of Emergency Physicians Phi Beta Kappa Society for Academic Emergency Medicine Emergency Medicine Residents&#039; Association Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Pharmacy Editor 
         Jasmeet Anand, PharmD, RPh Adjunct Instructor, University of Nebraska Medical Center College of Pharmacy; Editor-in-Chief, Medscape Drug Reference Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Chief Editor 
         Thomas E Herchline, MD Professor of Medicine, Wright State University, Boonshoft School of Medicine; Medical Director, Public Health, Dayton and Montgomery County, Ohio Thomas E Herchline, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  Alpha Omega Alpha Infectious Diseases Society of Ohio Infectious Diseases Society of America Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
     
       Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The Pre-Travel Consultation: Malaria. Available at  http://1.usa.gov/lmZudn 
       Perez-Jorge E, Herchline T. Malaria. Medscape Reference. Available at  http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/221134-overview 
       World Health Organization (WHO).  Guidelines for the Treatment of Malaria [Full Text] 
       Sagara I,  Piarroux R,  Djimde A,  Giorgi R,  Kayentao K,  Doumbo OK, et al. Delayed anemia assessment in patients treated with oral artemisinin derivatives for uncomplicated malaria: a pooled analysis of clinical trials data from Mali.  Malar J [Medline] 
       Carvalho LJ, Moreira Ada S, Daniel-Ribeiro CT, Martins YC. Vascular dysfunction as a target for adjuvant therapy in cerebral malaria.  Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Paczkowski MM, Landman KL, Arguin PM. Update on cases of delayed hemolysis after parenteral artesunate therapy for malaria - United States, 2008 and 2013.  MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep [Medline] 
       FDA Drug Safety Communication: FDA approves label changes for antimalarial drug mefloquine hydrochloride due to risk of serious psychiatric and nerve side effects. Available at  http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm362227.htm#

Article 15:

   
     Nonbacterial and Noninfectious Cystitis 
       Nonbacterial and Noninfectious Cystitis: Background, Anatomy, Pathophysiology Nonbacterial and Noninfectious Cystitis Differential Diagnoses Nonbacterial and Noninfectious Cystitis Workup: Approach Considerations Nonbacterial and Noninfectious Cystitis Treatment & Management: Approach Considerations, Treatment of Infectious Nonbacterial Cystitis, Treatment of Noninfectious Nonbacterial Cystitis Nonbacterial and Noninfectious Cystitis Medication: Antibiotics, Other, Antifungal, Systemic, Antivirals, Others, Antiparasitic Agents, Antidotes, Other 
       Nonbacterial and Noninfectious Cystitis: Background, Anatomy, Pathophysiology Nonbacterial and Noninfectious Cystitis Differential Diagnoses Nonbacterial and Noninfectious Cystitis Workup: Approach Considerations Nonbacterial and Noninfectious Cystitis Treatment & Management: Approach Considerations, Treatment of Infectious Nonbacterial Cystitis, Treatment of Noninfectious Nonbacterial Cystitis Nonbacterial and Noninfectious Cystitis Medication: Antibiotics, Other, Antifungal, Systemic, Antivirals, Others, Antiparasitic Agents, Antidotes, Other 
       Overview
 Background Anatomy Pathophysiology Etiology Epidemiology Prognosis Differential Diagnoses
 Workup
 Approach Considerations Treatment
 Approach Considerations Treatment of Infectious Nonbacterial Cystitis Treatment of Noninfectious Nonbacterial Cystitis Medication
 
       Nonbacterial and Noninfectious Cystitis Overview Nonbacterial and Noninfectious Cystitis Differential Diagnoses Nonbacterial and Noninfectious Cystitis Workup Nonbacterial and Noninfectious Cystitis Treatment Nonbacterial and Noninfectious Cystitis Medication 2056602-overview Apr 28, 2015 2015-06-18-16:15 0 Urology 2002 Diseases & Conditions Condition 
       1 2 content 2056602 502 720 15 ssg 
     Jun 18, 2015 
       condition Diseases & Conditions 
       urology Urology 
       urology_infections Infections and Related Inflammatory Conditions nonbacterial and noninfectious cystitis, interstitial cystitis, noninfectious cystitis, urgency-frequency syndrome, chemical cystitis, radiation cystitis, autoimmune cystitis, viral cystitis, mycobacterial cystitis, chlamydial cystitis, fungal cystitis, hypersensitivity cystitis, nonbacterial infectious cystitis, potassium leak test, chronic pelvic pain syndrome, painful bladder syndrome, infectious cystitis, tuberculous cystitis, eosinophilic cystitis Nonbacterial cystitis is a catchall term that encompasses various medical disorders, including infectious and noninfectious cystitis, as well as painful bladder syndrome/interstitial cystitis (PBS/IC). PBS/IC describes a syndrome of pain and genitourinary symptoms (eg, frequency, urgency, pain, dysuria, nocturia) for which no etiology can be ... 0 Nonbacterial and Noninfectious Cystitis 
     Overview 
       Background 
         Nonbacterial  cystitis noninfectious cystitis interstitial cystitis cystitis Infectious nonbacterial cystitis includes the following forms of the disease: 
           
             Viral 
             Mycobacterial 
             Chlamydial 
             Fungal 
             Schistosomal Candidal infection of the bladder is shown in the image below. 
           Gross pathology of the bladder with candidal infection and hemorrhage.  Gross pathology of the bladder with candidal infection and hemorrhage.  Noninfectious  nonbacterial cystitis 
           
             
               Radiation induced 
             Chemical 
             Autoimmune 
             Hypersensitivity General symptoms of cystitis include urgency, frequency, dysuria, and, occasionally, hematuria, dyspareunia, abdominal cramps, and/or bladder pain and spasms. Establishing or excluding a specific diagnosis often requires repeated cultures and various urologic procedures, including cystoscopy with bladder biopsies, various bladder tests, and immune system function examinations. Some conditions, such as  carcinoma in situ bladder calculi For patient education information, see the  Women's Health Center Bladder Control Problems Blood in the Urine Cystoscopy Pain During Intercourse 
       Anatomy 
         The images below demonstrate the anatomy of the female pelvis, the gross anatomy of the bladder, and the muscles of the pelvic floor that may be involved in nonbacterial cystitis. 
           Gross anatomy of the female pelvis.  Gross anatomy of the female pelvis.  
           Gross anatomy of the bladder.  Gross anatomy of the bladder.  
           Female perineal anatomy. The urogenital diaphragm and levator ani muscles have been removed,... Female perineal anatomy. The urogenital diaphragm and levator ani muscles have been removed, revealing the internal pudendal nerves and vessels, the rectum, and the posterior vaginal wall.  
       Pathophysiology 
         The pathophysiology of the disorder depends on its etiology. Advances in understanding the pathophysiology of complex pain syndromes have demonstrated growth of bridging neurons in the dorsal horns of the spinal cord between the type C pain fibers and the type A pain fibers, indicating perception of pain started by stimulus that is usually nonpainful.  Another example of neural cross-talk is an experiment in rats that demonstrated increased muscle spasm in the bladder with colonic irritation and in the colon with bladder irritation. This may help to explain the concomitant occurrences of irritable bowel syndrome, pelvic pain syndrome, and interstitial cystitis. [ 
         Infectious cystitis 
           Viruses Cytopathologic viruses, such as herpes simplex virus–1 (HSV-1) and HSV-2, live integrated into the host genome in the nervous system. Impairment of immune surveillance, which can be caused by comorbid diseases, drugs, or chronic activation of the neuroendocrine pathways involved with corticosteroid production, allow the virus to activate, travel down the peripheral nerves, and cause an outbreak of the disease. Viruses normally do not cause cystitis in immunocompetent adults. In a given patient, however, whether the infection is due to primary infection or reactivation of latent virus is unclear.  
           Chlamydia Chlamydiae are obligate, intracellular parasites with a unique reproductive cycle that involves 2 forms: (1) an extracellular form adapted to survival in the environment, which allows the infection to be transmitted from one person to another, and (2) an intracellular form that replicates and produces more extracellular forms.  Chlamydia trachomatis 
           
             Urethritis 
             Cervicitis 
             Pelvic inflammatory disease 
             Proctitis 
             Epididymitis 
           Mycobacteria Initial infection with mycobacteria generally elicits a mild inflammatory response with few or no symptoms. Weeks after the primary infection, with continued replication of the bacilli, development of cell-mediated immunity leads to macrophage infiltration and ingestion of the pathogen.  While mycobacteria can persist within macrophages, replication usually ceases, and spread of the disease is contained. Individuals with disturbances in cell-mediated immune responses are therefore at higher risk for dissemination of the infection.  
           Other infections Fungal infections can occur in immunocompetent hosts, but they are more likely to occur in individuals with abnormal immune systems. Species of fungi associated with urogenital fungal infections include  Blastomyces dermatitidis Candida Torulopsis glabrata Schistosomiasis Schistosoma 
         Noninfectious cystitis Radiation cystitis is presumably due to the ionizing radiation administered for treatment for pelvic and urogenital cancers. In a study by Perez et al, [ Eosinophilic cystitis has been associated with various etiologic factors, such as allergies, bladder tumors, and parasitic infections, which stimulate antigen formation, leading to antigen-antibody complexes that stimulate inflammatory cascades. This, in turn, leads to eosinophil infiltration and chemokine release, causing fibrosis. [ Chemical cystitis, which is due to chemotherapy with alkylating agents such as cyclophosphamide, is thought to be due to metabolites excreted in the urine. The effects appear to be related to the dose and duration of therapy.  
       Etiology 
         Infectious etiologies Viruses normally do not cause cystitis in immunocompetent adults. Improved molecular detection techniques have allowed the recognition of viral infections, such as the following, in immunocompromised patients:  
           
             BK polyomavirus infections [ 
             Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infections (associated with hemorrhagic cystitis after bone marrow transplantation [ 
             Adenovirus infections [ Herpes and chlamydial cystitis are sexually transmitted, while other types, such as fungal cystitis, occur mainly in immunocompromised hosts. [ Corynebacterium urealyticum [ 
           Infiltration of yeast in the bladder wall.  Infiltration of yeast in the bladder wall.  Schistosomiasis Schistosoma 
           Schistosomiasis of the ureter.  Schistosomiasis of the ureter.  
         Noninfectious etiologies Cystitis may occur following radiation therapy to the pelvis for cancer treatment. The average time from the beginning of radiation therapy to initial symptoms can be several months to several years. Symptoms can include anything from mild bleeding to severe, recurrent bleeding and pain requiring hospitalization for treatment.  Autoimmune diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) or Sjögren syndrome can also be associated with irritative bladder symptoms, such as frequency or pain. Eosinophilic cystitis is a rare pathologic condition characterized by transmural inflammation of the bladder predominantly by eosinophils and fibrosis, with or without muscle necrosis. [ Cystitis may also be caused by chemicals and medications. Intravenous and oral cyclophosphamide, used to treat malignancies and vasculitides (eg, SLE,  Wegener granulomatosis [ [ Reports have documented cystitis arising after the recreational abuse of ketamine, an anesthetic agent. Such cases are characterized by marked frequency, urgency, and dysuria and display cystoscopic evidence of inflammation throughout the bladder. [ 
       Epidemiology 
         Infectious cystitis The frequency of viral and herpetic cystitis is unclear because culture results can be falsely negative. For example, it has been proposed that both HSV-1 and HSV-2 may initially cause asymptomatic infections, so the incidence of herpetic cystitis may be higher than culture-positive results indicate.  Hemorrhagic cystitis due to adenoviral infections is common in immunocompromised hosts, especially bone marrow transplant recipients or those with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). Hemorrhagic cystitis due to infection with adenoviruses or BK polyomavirus has been reported in 20% and 8% of pediatric bone marrow transplant patients, respectively.  The frequency of chlamydial genitourinary infections may also be higher than cultures indicate. A study of 130 patients aged 14-25 years in an urban outpatient clinic demonstrated a 21% frequency of  C trachomatis Chlamydia C trachomatis Mycobacterial cystitis or urogenital tuberculosis is more common in underdeveloped countries and continues to be a major urologic problem in places such as North Africa, mainly because of diagnosis delays. The tuberculosis vaccine, bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG), which may be instilled into the bladder to treat bladder tumors, has also been reported to cause cystitis.  Fungal cystitis, most commonly due to  Candida [ Schistosomiasis most frequently occurs in the developing world, although it is estimated that 400,000 cases exist in the United States. There are five different species of schistosomes;  Schistosoma haematobium [ 
         Noninfectious cystitis Radiation cystitis was reported to occur in 6.5% of 1784 patients treated with a combination of external beam and intracavitary radiotherapy for stage Ib carcinoma of the cervix. Perez et al reported moderate-to-severe cystitis occurring in 12% of 738 patients treated with definitive irradiation therapy for prostate cancer after 10 years. [ Autoimmune disease related to cystitis is another entity that may be more common than previously realized. A review in Sweden demonstrated that 17% of all patients diagnosed with interstitial cystitis had rheumatoid arthritis, 47% had hypersensitivity reactions or allergies, and 2.3% had either ulcerative colitis or Crohn disease, a rate more than 30 times the prevalence rate in the general population.  Both Sjögren syndrome and SLE have been associated with urinary symptoms. In one study by Haarala et al of 121 patients and 121 age- and sex-matched controls, more than 60% of patients had some urinary symptoms, compared with 20% of controls. [ 
       Prognosis 
         Infectious etiologies Infectious causes of nonbacterial cystitis, such as HSV-1 or HSV-2, can be treated; however, the treatment does not eliminate the dormant virus integrated into the host genome, so the disease can recur.  Both chlamydial and mycobacterial infections can be cured. For chlamydial disease, cure is not protective and the disease can be reacquired. In addition, while mycobacterial infections can generally be cured with regimens containing 3 or 4 drugs, a review by Mnif et al of 60 cases of urogenital tuberculosis found that only 2 were cured by medical therapy alone. [ Of the remaining patients, 54 required one of the following surgical interventions: 
           
             Nephrectomy (43 patients) 
             Ureterovesical reimplantation (7) 
             Augmentation enterocystoplasty (11) 
             Other ureteral diversions (5) Two patients whose medical status and nutritional status were poor to begin with died despite aggressive therapy. Fungal infections are usually curable, depending on the underlying health status of the patient. Because patients with severe immunosuppression (eg, those with untreatable malignancies, AIDS, poorly controlled diabetes, transplant recipients) are the ones most likely to develop these infections, some patients may require continued treatment to ensure that the infection does not recur.  
         Noninfectious etiologies Radiation cystitis, when it does occur, is usually mild and does not require specific therapy. [ [ Chemical cystitis due to chemotherapy agents is generally mild, with no long-term consequences, and resolves when the medications are stopped. No known cures exist for autoimmune disease–associated cystitis, but symptoms can often be controlled with anti-inflammatory agents or corticosteroids. Eosinophilic cystitis often recurs despite resection of the lesion and anti-inflammatory treatments, so long-term follow-up is required. [ 
     Differential Diagnoses 
       Diagnostic Considerations Chronic pelvic pain syndrome is a common and debilitating condition of multifactorial etiology, including social, psychological, and biologic factors. This is a diagnosis of exclusion, after other etiologies of pelvic pain have been eliminated from the differential. [ 
       
         Chronic Pelvic Pain in Men 
         Chronic Pelvic Pain in Women 
     Workup 
       Approach Considerations 
         Infectious etiologies 
           Viruses Viral infections are often difficult to diagnose, and viral culture results can be falsely negative. Some viruses can be detected by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay or by detection of antibodies to the virus. Also,  Chlamydia Chlamydia [ 
           Mycobacteria Prior mycobacterial infection, such as  Mycobacterium tuberculosis M tuberculosis Mycobacteria can also be detected with examination of tissue stained with the acid-fast dye carbolfuchsin as slender, curved, polychromatic, beaded rods in pairs or small clumps. Growing the bacteria on highly selective media allows cultivation within 1-2 weeks, although identification and antibiotic sensitivity testing may take longer. Finally, mycobacterial infection can be detected with PCR assay. In a study by Moussa et al, the sensitivity of acid-fast bacilli (AFB) staining was 52% versus 96% for PCR assay, when compared with cultures. [ Intravenous urography remains the primary imaging modality for mycobacterial cystitis, although ultrasonography, computed tomography (CT) scanning, or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may also be used. However, all imaging findings may be normal in early disease. For more information, see the Medscape Reference article  Imaging of Tuberculosis in the Genitourinary Tract 
           Other infections Fungal infection can be indicated by the findings of hyphae and/or spores on microscopic evaluation of wet smears or histopathologic sections or by culture. Microbiologic diagnosis of funguria is based on a fungal concentration of more than 10 3 [ Candida Blastomyces dermatitidis, [ Schistosomal infection is detected by searching for terminally spined eggs in urinary sediment. Histopathologic analysis can also be performed with a squash preparation on a glass slide. Urinary, urethral, and/or vaginal or prostatic cultures can also be performed. Special stains or PCR assays for viruses, chlamydia, fungi, and mycobacteria should be included in selected patients.  
         Noninfectious etiologies The diagnosis of cystitis due to radiation therapy, chemicals, or autoimmune disease can be established in part by obtaining the relevant history. In patients with radiation cystitis, associated urinary tract infections are not uncommon. Cystoscopy may be required to exclude other causes of bleeding, such as recurrent tumor, a new primary tumor, or benign prostatic hyperplasia. Cystoscopy with biopsy is the criterion standard for diagnosing eosinophilic cystitis. [ Diagnosis of autoimmune diseases relies on a compatible history supported by serologic or tissue confirmation. Detection of antinuclear antibodies (ANA) is often used as a screening test for connective tissue disease; positive test results are subjected to assays that are more specific. Serologic tests likely to be positive in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) include low C3, anti–double stranded (ds) DNA, anti-Smith (Sm), and antiribonucleoprotein (anti-RNP) antibodies. In patients with SLE and bladder involvement, abdominal CT scanning may demonstrate thickening of the bladder wall, hydronephrosis, ascites, and bowel-wall thickening. [ Biopsy of other affected organs may show vasculitis. Tests likely to have positive results in patients with Sj ö gren syndrome include the Schirmer tear test, anti-Ro(SS-A) and anti-La(SS-B), and minor lacrimal gland biopsy. Urine cytology can be a useful first step in the diagnosis of genitourinary malignancies.  
     Treatment & Management 
       Approach Considerations 
         Treatment of nonbacterial cystitis addresses the specific cause. Noninfectious etiologies that require separate consideration are radiation cystitis, chemical cystitis, autoimmune cystitis, and interstitial cystitis. For treatment options in painful bladder syndrome/interstitial cystitis, see the Medscape Reference article  Interstitial Cystitis With infectious cystitis, the cause may be viral, chlamydial, mycobacterial, schistosomal, or fungal. Most infectious cases are treated with systemic and, in some cases, local pharmacotherapy. If the patient is taking immunosuppressive medication, the treatment regimen may need to be adjusted.  Some types of infectious, recurrent, nonbacterial cystitis are being treated with transfer factor (TF) specific for the kind of infection ( Candida, [ 
       Treatment of Infectious Nonbacterial Cystitis 
         Viral cystitis Treatment for immunocompetent adults with cystitis from herpes simplex virus–1 (HSV-1) or HSV-2 includes acyclovir 400mg 5 times daily for 7 days or valacyclovir 500mg twice daily for 5-10 days. Acyclovir requires dose adjustment for patients with a decreased glomerular filtration rate.  Ganciclovir and vidarabine have been used in some cases of hemorrhagic cystitis from cytomegalovirus (CMV) or adenovirus in patients who have undergone bone marrow transplantation. [ Cystitis due to BK polyomavirus reportedly resolved without treatment in 9 pediatric patients. However, in adults who have undergone renal transplantation, cidofovir and a decrease in the dose of immunosuppressants are usually recommended, because of the concern of renal parenchymal damage from the virus. Mycophenolate mofetil has been associated with more adenoviral infections than azathioprine.  
         Chlamydial cystitis Treatment regimens for cystitis caused by  Chlamydia 
           
             Doxycycline, 100mg twice daily for 7 days 
             Azithromycin, 1g orally as a single dose 
             Erythromycin, 500mg 4 times daily for 7 days 
             A fluoroquinolone (eg, ofloxacin, 300mg twice daily for 7 days) Erythromycin, azithromycin, and amoxicillin can also be used in pregnant women. 
         Mycobacterial cystitis Mycobacterial treatment begins with 3 or 4 agents, generally including isoniazid (INH) and rifampin (RIF), depending on the probable sensitivities of the organism and the underlying state of the immune system. A standard regimen is as follows:  
           
             INH 300mg/day 
             RIF 600 mg once daily 
             Ethambutol (EMB) 15mg/kg/day 
             Pyrazinamide 2g/day Other drugs that can be used include streptomycin 0.75-1g/day, ethionamide (ETH) 1g/day, or one of the fluoroquinolones. Treatment regimens are modified when the actual drug sensitivities are determined. Drug toxicities sufficient to require a change in regimen occur in up to 5% of patients.  Surgery is rarely needed to treat  tuberculosis of the genitourinary system 
         Fungal cystitis Treatment is recommended only when the funguria is symptomatic or in cases of fungal colonization when host factors increase the risk of fungemia. [ In immunosuppressed patients, another option may be intravenous amphotericin B, depending on the degree of dissemination of the infection. Azole antifungal agents are often not effective against  Candida [ [ Echinocandins (eg, caspofungin, micafungin), a newer class of agents that are active against azole- and polyene-resistant fungi, are a possible alternative. One trial that compared caspofungin with amphotericin B for invasive candidiasis demonstrated similar efficacy and markedly fewer side effects for caspofungin. Some infectious disease specialists consider caspofungin to be first-line therapy against invasive non- albicans If bladder outlet obstruction is suspected in the setting of severe funguria, a Foley catheter or suprapubic tube can be placed. After resolution of the infection, benign prostatic hyperplasia should be managed surgically.  
         Schistosomal cystitis All patients with schistosomiasis should be treated, regardless of disease severity. [ Surgery should be reserved for cases that do not respond to medical therapy or for patients with intractable gross hematuria. Schistosomiasis can cause large granulomas in the bladder, which may warrant surgical extirpation.  Obstructive uropathy due to ureteral strictures is the most common sequela. Management of ureteral stricture is based on the stricture length and location. Deep, nonhealing bladder ulcers may require partial cystectomy, while biopsy-proven bladder cancer often requires radical cystectomy.  
       Treatment of Noninfectious Nonbacterial Cystitis 
         Radiation cystitis While minor bleeding episodes due to radiation treatment stop without treatment, severe bleeding may require hospitalization for therapy. Clot evacuation and continuous bladder irrigation are the standard treatment for heavy bleeding. A small number of patients with severe bleeding require further treatment. Methods that have been tried include hyperbaric oxygen therapy and chemical therapy.  Urinary diversion [ In a study by Del Pizzo et al of long-term results of hyperbaric oxygen in 11 patients, 3 had complete resolution of symptoms, 3 had persistent symptoms, and 5 had initial improvement but then relapsed. [ [ Srisupundit and colleagues reported good short-term results (follow-up, 1-9mo) in 13 of 20 patients treated with an intravenous infusion of a chemically stabilized chlorite matrix tetrachlorodecaoxygen (TCDO). [ 
         Chemical cystitis Chemical cystitis from chemotherapy agents, such as cyclophosphamide, may resolve with hydration or with discontinuation of the drug. Another alternative is mesna, a semisynthetic sulfhydryl compound that reacts chemically with the drug metabolites that cause urotoxicity, detoxifying them in a manner similar to the physiologic cysteine-cystine system.  Ballen and colleagues suggested that extremely aggressive hydration with intravenous fluids and diuretics to maintain a urine output greater than 150mL/h may be as effective a therapy as mesna, as well as being much less expensive. [ 
         Autoimmune cystitis Treatment of autoimmune diseases generally relies on a combination of symptomatic relief, anti-inflammatory drugs, and immunosuppressive agents. In the last several years, monoclonal antibodies to tumor necrosis factor (TNF)–alpha and several of the interleukins have markedly improved symptoms in some of the rheumatic diseases. The greater variety of immunologic targets amenable to treatment modification has allowed rheumatologists to tailor combinations of drugs to yield improved efficacy with fewer symptoms.  At present, no therapy for eosinophilic cystitis is curative. Treatments that have been tried include anti-inflammatory therapies with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and steroids and transurethral resection of the bladder lesion. [ 
     Medication 
       Medication Summary The goals of pharmacotherapy are to eradicate the infection, to reduce morbidity, and to prevent complications. Depending on the cause, the agents used may include antimicrobials, antifungals, antivirals, anthelmintics, or antidotes. A combination of the antibiotics isoniazid (INH), rifampin (RIF), ethambutol, and pyrazinamide are commonly used to treat mycobacterial cystitis, while oral fluconazole or bladder irrigations containing amphotericin B can be used against fungal cystitis. The antiviral agents acyclovir and valacyclovir are administered for the treatment of cystitis caused by herpes simplex virus-1 (HSV-1) or HSV-2. Ganciclovir and the prodrug valganciclovir are employed against hemorrhagic cystitis caused by cytomegalovirus (CMV). Praziquantel kills the parasites responsible for schistosomiasis, with the current recommended therapy being 2 oral doses of praziquantel 40mg/kg for 1 day; this regimen has an 83-100% cure rate.  
       Antibiotics, Other 
         Class Summary Empiric antimicrobial therapy must be comprehensive and should cover all likely pathogens in the context of the clinical setting. 
         Rifampin (Rifadin) Rifampin inhibits ribonucleic acid (RNA) synthesis in bacteria by binding to the beta subunit of DNA-dependent RNA polymerase, which in turn blocks RNA transcription. The dosage in adults is 600mg orally once daily for 6 months. Rifampin induces microsomal enzymes, which may decrease the effects of other drugs. Blood pressure may increase with coadministration of enalapril. Coadministration with isoniazid or pyrazinamide may result in a higher rate of hepatotoxicity than with either agent alone (discontinue 1 or both agents if alterations in liver function test results occur). Obtain complete blood counts (CBCs) and baseline clinical chemistries prior to and throughout rifampin therapy. In liver disease, weigh the benefits of rifampin use against the risk of further liver damage. Interruption of therapy and high-dose, intermittent therapy are associated with thrombocytopenia that is reversible if therapy is discontinued as soon as purpura occurs; if treatment is continued or resumed after the appearance of purpura, cerebral hemorrhage or death may occur. Rifampin is a pregnancy category C drug.  
         Isoniazid Isoniazid is an isonicotinic acid hydrazide. This agent is used as part of a triple-drug regimen. The adult dosage is 300 mg orally once daily for 6 months. Previous isoniazid-associated hepatic injury or other severe adverse reactions are contraindications. Daily alcohol ingestion may predispose patients to isoniazid-related hepatitis. Aluminum salts may decrease isoniazid serum levels (administer 1-2 hours before taking aluminum salts). Isoniazid may increase anticoagulants' effects with coadministration and may inhibit the metabolic clearance of benzodiazepines. Carbamazepine toxicity or isoniazid hepatotoxicity may result from concurrent use (monitor carbamazepine concentrations and liver function). Coadministration with cycloserine may increase central nervous system (CNS) side effects (eg, dizziness). Acute behavioral and coordination changes may occur with coadministration of disulfiram. Coadministration with rifampin after halothane anesthesia may result in hepatotoxicity and hepatic encephalopathy. Isoniazid may inhibit hepatic microsomal enzymes and increase toxicity of hydantoin. Monitor patients with active chronic liver disease or severe renal dysfunction; periodic ophthalmologic examinations during isoniazid therapy are recommended even when visual symptoms do not occur. Isoniazid is a pregnancy category C drug.  
         Pyrazinamide Pyrazinamide is used only in combination with other effective antituberculous agents. Its mechanism of action is unknown. It is well absorbed from the gastrointestinal (GI) tract and hydrolyzed to its active metabolite in the liver. Note that 70% is excreted in urine within 24 hours. Treat patients with drug-resistant disease with individualized regimens. The adult dose is 2g orally once daily for 2 months. Contraindications include severe hepatic damage and acute gout. Coadministration with rifampin may result in a higher rate of hepatotoxicity than with either agent alone (discontinue if alterations in liver function test results occur). Pyrazinamide inhibits the renal excretion of urates and may result in hyperuricemia (usually asymptomatic). Perform baseline serum uric acid determinations, and discontinue the drug upon signs of hyperuricemia with acute gouty arthritis. Perform baseline liver function tests (closely monitor in liver disease) and discontinue the drug if signs of hepatocellular damage appear. Observe caution when there is a history of diabetes mellitus. Pyrazinamide is a pregnancy category C drug.  
         Ethambutol (Myambutol) Ethambutol diffuses into actively growing mycobacterial cells, such as tubercle bacilli. It impairs cell metabolism by inhibiting synthesis of 1 or more metabolites, which in turn causes cell death. No cross-resistance has been demonstrated. Mycobacterial resistance is frequent with previous therapy. Use in these patients in combination with previously unadministered second-line drugs. The adult dosage of ethambutol is 15mg/kg orally once daily for 2 months. Aluminum salts may delay and reduce absorption (give several hours before or after ethambutol dose). Reduce the dose in patients with impaired renal function. Optic neuritis may develop but is reversible if the drug is promptly discontinued. Ethambutol is a pregnancy category C drug.  
         Doxycycline (Adoxa, Doryx, Periostat, Vibramycin, Monodox) Doxycycline is a broad-spectrum, synthetically derived, bacteriostatic antibiotic in the tetracycline class. It is almost completely absorbed, concentrates in bile, and is excreted in urine and feces as a biologically active metabolite in high concentrations. It inhibits protein synthesis and, thus, bacterial growth by binding to 30S and, possibly, 50S ribosomal subunits of susceptible bacteria. It may block dissociation of peptidyl transfer RNA (tRNA) from ribosomes, causing RNA-dependent protein synthesis to arrest. The adult dosage is 100mg orally twice daily. Severe hepatic dysfunction is a contraindication. The bioavailability of doxycycline decreases with antacids containing aluminum, calcium, magnesium, iron, or bismuth subsalicylate. Tetracyclines can increase the hypoprothrombinemic effects of anticoagulants and can decrease the efficacy of oral contraceptives, causing breakthrough bleeding and increased risk of pregnancy. Photosensitivity may occur with prolonged exposure to sunlight or tanning equipment. Reduce the dose in patients with renal impairment. Consider drug serum level determinations in prolonged therapy. Tetracycline use during tooth development (the last half of pregnancy through age 8 years) can permanently discolor teeth. Fanconi-like syndrome may occur with outdated tetracyclines. Doxycycline is a pregnancy category D drug.  
         Azithromycin (Zithromax, Zmax) Azithromycin is used to treat mild to moderate microbial infections. In adults, it is given in a single dose of 1g orally. Azithromycin acts by binding to the 50S ribosomal subunit of susceptible microorganisms and blocks dissociation of peptidyl tRNA from ribosomes, causing RNA-dependent protein synthesis to arrest. Nucleic acid synthesis is not affected. It concentrates in phagocytes and fibroblasts, as demonstrated by in vitro incubation techniques. In vivo studies suggest that the concentration in phagocytes may contribute to drug distribution to inflamed tissues. Contraindications to azithromycin use include hepatic impairment. Do not administer with pimozide. Azithromycin may increase the toxicity of theophylline, warfarin, and digoxin; effects are reduced with coadministration of aluminum and/or magnesium antacids. Nephrotoxicity and neurotoxicity may occur when this agent is coadministered with cyclosporine. Site reactions can occur when it is given by the IV route. Bacterial or fungal overgrowth may result from prolonged antibiotic use. Azithromycin may increase hepatic enzymes and cholestatic jaundice. Use this agent with caution in patients with impaired hepatic function or prolonged QT intervals. Azithromycin is a pregnancy category B drug.  
         Ofloxacin Ofloxacin penetrates the prostate well and is effective against  Neisseria gonorrhoeae Chlamydia trachomatis Antacids, iron salts, and zinc salts may reduce serum levels. Patients should take antacids 2-4 hours before or after taking fluoroquinolones. Cimetidine may interfere with the metabolism of fluoroquinolones. Ofloxacin may increase the toxicity of theophylline, caffeine, cyclosporine, and digoxin (monitor digoxin levels) and may increase the effects of anticoagulants (monitor the prothrombin time). In prolonged therapy, periodically evaluate organ system functions (eg, renal, hepatic, hematopoietic). Adjust the dose in patients with impaired renal function. Superinfections may occur with prolonged or repeated antibiotic therapy. Ofloxacin is a pregnancy category C drug.  
       Antifungal, Systemic 
         Class Summary The mechanism of action of antifungal agents may involve an alteration of RNA and DNA metabolism or an intracellular accumulation of peroxide that is toxic to the fungal cell.  
         Amphotericin B deoxycholate Amphotericin B is produced from a strain of  Streptomyces nodosus At low concentrations, the main effect of this agent is increased intracellular loss of potassium, resulting in reversible fungistatic activity; however, at higher concentrations, pores of 40-105nm in the cytoplasmic membrane are produced, leading to large losses of ions and other molecules. A second effect of amphotericin B is its ability to cause auto-oxidation of the cytoplasmic membrane and the release of lethal free radicals. The main fungicidal activity of amphotericin B may reside in its ability to cause auto-oxidation of cell membranes. The adult dose is 0.5mg/kg intravenously once daily for 7-14 days; 50mcg/mL can be given as bladder irrigation continuously for 5 days. Antineoplastic agents may enhance the potential of amphotericin B for renal toxicity, bronchospasm, and hypotension. Corticosteroids, digitalis, and thiazides may potentiate hypokalemia. The risk of renal toxicity is increased with cyclosporine. Monitor renal function, serum electrolytes (eg, magnesium, potassium), liver function, CBCs, and hemoglobin concentrations. Resume therapy at the lowest dose level (eg, 0.25mg/kg) when therapy is interrupted for more than 7 days. Hypoxemia, acute dyspnea, and interstitial infiltrates may occur in neutropenic patients receiving leukocyte transfusions (give amphotericin infusions at different times than leukocyte transfusions). Fever and chills are not uncommon after the first few doses of the drug. Rare acute reactions may include hypotension, bronchospasm, arrhythmias, and shock. Amphotericin B is a pregnancy category B drug. 
         Fluconazole (Diflucan) Fluconazole is a synthetic oral antifungal (broad-spectrum bistriazole) that selectively inhibits fungal cytochrome P-450 and sterol C-14 alpha-demethylation; this prevents the conversion of lanosterol to ergosterol, thereby disrupting cellular membranes. The drug has little affinity for mammalian cytochromes, which is believed to explain its low toxicity. Fluconazole is available in tablet form for oral administration, as a powder for oral suspension, and as a sterile solution for intravenous use. It has fewer adverse effects and better tissue distribution than older systemic imidazoles. The adult dosage is 200mg orally or intravenously once daily for 7-14 days. Probenecid, zidovudine, or cimetidine coadministration prolongs the half-life and increases CNS toxicity. Adjust the dose for renal insufficiency; closely monitor if rashes develop, and discontinue the drug if lesions progress. Fluconazole may cause clinical hepatitis, cholestasis, and fulminant hepatic failure (including death) in patients with certain underlying medical conditions (eg, AIDS, malignancy) or in those taking multiple, concomitant medications. It is not recommended for breastfeeding mothers. The convenience and efficacy of a single-dose regimen for treatment of vaginal yeast infections should be weighed against the difficulties resulting from the higher incidence of adverse reactions reported with oral fluconazole versus intravaginal agents. Fluconazole is a pregnancy category C drug.  
       Antivirals, Others 
         Class Summary Nucleoside analogues are initially phosphorylated by viral thymidine kinase to eventually form a nucleoside triphosphate. These molecules inhibit HSV polymerase with 30-50 times the potency of human alpha-DNA polymerase.  
         Acyclovir (Zovirax) Acyclovir is activated via phosphorylation by virus-specific thymidine kinase. Guanylate kinase converts the monophosphate form into diphosphate and triphosphate analogues that inhibit viral DNA replication. Acyclovir has affinity for viral thymidine kinase and, once phosphorylated, causes DNA-chain termination when acted on by DNA polymerase. Acyclovir inhibits the activity of HSV-1 and HSV-2. Patients experience less pain and faster resolution of cutaneous lesions when this agent is started within 48 hours of rash onset. It may prevent recurrent outbreaks. Early initiation of therapy is imperative. The adult dosage is 400mg orally 5 times daily for 7 days. Concomitant use of probenecid or zidovudine prolongs the half-life and increases the CNS toxicity of acyclovir. Use this agent with caution in patients with renal failure or those using nephrotoxic drugs. Acyclovir is a pregnancy category B drug. 
         Valacyclovir (Valtrex) Valacyclovir is a prodrug that is rapidly converted to the active drug acyclovir. It is more expensive than acyclovir but has a more convenient dosing regimen. The adult dosage is 500mg orally twice daily for 5-10 days. The risk of hyperkalemia is increased in patients taking angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, cyclosporine, and potassium-sparing diuretics. Use valacyclovir with caution in patients with renal failure (decrease the dose) and in patients who are also taking nephrotoxic drugs. Valacyclovir is associated with the onset of hemolytic uremic syndrome. Valacyclovir is a pregnancy category B drug. 
         Valganciclovir (Valcyte) Valganciclovir is an L-valyl ester prodrug of ganciclovir used for CMV disease prophylaxis in various solid organ transplants. Ganciclovir is a synthetic analogue of 2'-deoxyguanosine, which inhibits replication of human CMV in vitro and in vivo. Viral activity is halted due to the inhibition of viral DNA synthesis. This agent has the advantage of once- or twice-daily oral administration. It achieves serum levels comparable to those obtained with intravenous ganciclovir. The adult dosage is 450mg orally twice daily for 21 days. Contraindications include severe renal dysfunction or hemodialysis, pregnancy, breastfeeding, or an absolute neutrophil count of less than 500 cells/µL, a platelet count of less than 25,000/µL, or a hemoglobin level of less than 8g/dL. Interactions with valganciclovir are similar to those reported with ganciclovir. Coadministration with cytotoxic drugs such as dapsone, vinblastine, doxorubicin, pentamidine, flucytosine, vincristine, amphotericin B, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole combinations, or other nucleoside analogues may result in additive toxicity of rapidly dividing cell populations, including bone marrow, spermatogonia, germinal layers of skin, and GI mucosa. Coadminister with these agents only if the benefits outweigh the risks. Coadministration with imipenem-cilastatin may cause generalized seizures (use only if the benefits outweigh the risks). Serum creatinine levels may increase following concurrent use of ganciclovir with either cyclosporine or amphotericin B. In the presence of probenecid, ganciclovir renal clearance is reduced; bioavailability may increase when didanosine is administered either 2 hours before or simultaneously with ganciclovir. The bioavailability of ganciclovir may decrease in the presence of zidovudine, while the bioavailability of zidovudine is increased in the presence of ganciclovir. Strict adherence to dosage guidelines of valganciclovir is essential to avoid overdose. Valganciclovir tablets may not be substituted for ganciclovir capsules on a one-to-one basis; adjust the dose according to the creatinine clearance (CrCl) in patients with impaired renal function. Valganciclovir may cause granulocytopenia, anemia, and thrombocytopenia. It is not indicated for CMV disease prevention in liver transplantation (the incidence of CMV disease in liver transplant recipients is higher with valganciclovir than with ganciclovir). Valganciclovir is a pregnancy category C drug.  
       Antiparasitic Agents 
         Class Summary The biochemical pathways of schistosomes are sufficiently different from those of the human host to allow selective interference by chemotherapeutic agents in relatively small doses.  
         Praziquantel (Biltricide) Praziquantel increases cell membrane permeability in susceptible worms, resulting in the loss of intracellular calcium, massive contractions, and paralysis of musculature. In addition, it produces vacuolization and disintegration of schistosome tegument. This is followed by attachment of phagocytes to the parasite and death. Tablets should be swallowed whole with some liquid during meals. Keeping the tablets in the mouth may reveal their bitter taste, which can produce nausea or vomiting. The adult dosage is 40mg/kg orally twice daily for 1 day. Ocular cysticercosis is a contraindication. Hydantoins may reduce serum praziquantel concentrations, possibly leading to treatment failures. Destruction of parasites within the eyes can cause irreparable lesions (ocular cysticercosis should not be treated with praziquantel). Patients should use caution while driving or performing other tasks requiring alertness on the day of treatment and on the following day. Minimal increases in liver enzymes have been reported. When schistosomiasis or fluke infection is associated with cerebral cysticercosis, hospitalize the patient for duration of treatment. Praziquantel is a pregnancy category B drug.  
       Antidotes, Other 
         Class Summary These agents counteract the toxic effects of drugs. 
         Mesna (Mesnex) In the kidney, mesna disulfide is reduced to free mesna. Free mesna has thiol groups that react with acrolein, the ifosfamide and cyclophosphamide metabolite considered responsible for urotoxicity. It inactivates acrolein and prevents urothelial toxicity without affecting cytostatic activity. The adult dosage is 240mg intravenously at 0, 4, 8 hours after the ifosfamide or cyclophosphamide dose. Mesna may increase warfarin effects. Mesna does not prevent hemorrhagic cystitis in all patients (monitoring for hematuria in the morning prior to ifosfamide or cyclophosphamide dose is required). It does not prevent or alleviate other toxicities associated with ifosfamide or cyclophosphamide. Common adverse effects include hypotension, headache, GI toxicity, and limb pain. Mesna is a pregnancy category B drug. 
     start media 
       
         Gross pathology of the bladder with candidal infection and hemorrhage.  Gross pathology of the bladder with candidal infection and hemorrhage.  
       
         Gross anatomy of the female pelvis.  Gross anatomy of the female pelvis.  
       
         Gross anatomy of the bladder.  Gross anatomy of the bladder.  
       
         Female perineal anatomy. The urogenital diaphragm and levator ani muscles have been removed,... Female perineal anatomy. The urogenital diaphragm and levator ani muscles have been removed, revealing the internal pudendal nerves and vessels, the rectum, and the posterior vaginal wall.  
       
         Schistosomiasis of the ureter.  Schistosomiasis of the ureter.  
       
         Infiltration of yeast in the bladder wall.  Infiltration of yeast in the bladder wall.  
     
       Author 
         Lynda A Frassetto, MD Clinical Professor, Department of Internal Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, School of Medicine Lynda A Frassetto, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American College of Physicians American Society of Nephrology Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Coauthor(s) 
         Benjamin Newell Breyer, MD, MS Assistant Professor, Trauma and Reconstruction, Department of Urology, University of California, San Francisco, School of Medicine Benjamin Newell Breyer, MD, MS is a member of the following medical societies:  Alpha Omega Alpha American College of Surgeons American Urological Association Endourological Society Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Chief Editor 
         Edward David Kim, MD, FACS Professor of Surgery, Division of Urology, University of Tennessee Graduate School of Medicine; Consulting Staff, University of Tennessee Medical Center Edward David Kim, MD, FACS is a member of the following medical societies:  American College of Surgeons Tennessee Medical Association Sexual Medicine Society of North America American Society for Reproductive Medicine American Society of Andrology American Urological Association Disclosure: Received honoraria from Lilly for speaking and teaching; Received honoraria from Astellas for speaking and teaching; Received honoraria from Actavis for speaking and teaching; Received honoraria from Auxilium for speaking and teaching. 
     Acknowledgements 
       Erik T Goluboff, MD Erik T Goluboff, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  Alpha Omega Alpha American Medical Association American Urological Association Medical Society of the State of New York New York Academy of Medicine Phi Beta Kappa Society for Basic Urologic Research Disclosure: Nothing to disclose.  Stephen W Leslie, MD, FACS Stephen W Leslie, MD, FACS is a member of the following medical societies:  American College of Surgeons American Urological Association National Kidney Foundation Ohio State Medical Association Disclosure: Nothing to disclose.  Grannum R Sant, MD Grannum R Sant, MD is a member of the following medical societies: American Urological Association, International Association for the Study of Pain, Massachusetts Medical Society, Society for Basic Urologic Research, and Society of University Urologists  Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. Francisco Talavera, PharmD, PhD Disclosure: Medscape Salary Employment  
     
       Pezzone MA, Liang R, Fraser MO. A model of neural cross-talk and irritation in the pelvis: implications for the overlap of chronic pelvic pain disorders.  Gastroenterology [Medline] 
       Perez CA, Lee HK, Georgiou A, Lockett MA. Technical factors affecting morbidity in definitive irradiation for localized carcinoma of the prostate.  Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys [Medline] 
       Teegavarapu PS, Sahai A, Chandra A, Dasgupta P, Khan MS. Eosinophilic cystitis and its management.  Int J Clin Pract [Medline] 
       Sharma BN, Li R, Bernhoff E, et al. Fluoroquinolones inhibit human polyomavirus BK (BKV) replication in primary human kidney cells.  Antiviral Res [Medline] 
       Boeckh M, Erard V, Zerr D, Englund J. Emerging viral infections after hematopoietic cell transplantation.  Pediatr Transplant [Medline] 
       Fioriti D,  Degener AM,  Mischitelli M,  Videtta M,  Arancio A,  Sica S, et al. BKV infection and hemorrhagic cystitis after allogeneic bone marrow transplant.  Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol [Medline] 
       Carrigan DR. Adenovirus infections in immunocompromised patients.  Am J Med [Medline] 
       Bavastrelli M,  Midulla M,  Rossi D,  Salzano M,  Calzolari E,  Midulla C, et al. Sexually active adolescents and young adults: a high-risk group for Chlamydia trachomatis infection.  J Travel Med [Medline] 
       Wald A,  Zeh J,  Selke S,  Warren T,  Ryncarz AJ,  Ashley R, et al. Reactivation of genital herpes simplex virus type 2 infection in asymptomatic seropositive persons.  N Engl J Med [Medline] 
       Pierciaccante A, Pompeo ME, Fabi F, Venditti M. Successful treatment of Corynebacterium urealyticum encrusted cystitis: a case report and literature review.  Infez Med [Medline] 
       Martin-Suarez I, D'Cruz D, Mansoor M, Fernandes AP, Khamashta MA, Hughes GR. Immunosuppressive treatment in severe connective tissue diseases: effects of low dose intravenous cyclophosphamide.  Ann Rheum Dis [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Kawabe Y,  Eguchi K,  Tsuboi M,  Kita M,  Tsukada T,  Takashima H, et al. [Untoward effects of low dose methotrexate therapy in rheumatoid arthritis].  Ryumachi [Medline] 
       Chu PS,  Ma WK,  Wong SC,  Chu RW,  Cheng CH,  Wong S, et al. The destruction of the lower urinary tract by ketamine abuse: a new syndrome?.  BJU Int [Medline] 
       Kauffman CA. Diagnosis and management of fungal urinary tract infection.  Infect Dis Clin North Am [Medline] 
       Barsoum RS. Schistosomiasis and the kidney.  Semin Nephrol [Medline] 
       Haarala M, Alanen A, Hietarinta M, Kiilholma P. Lower urinary tract symptoms in patients with Sjögren's syndrome and systemic lupus erythematosus.  Int Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct [Medline] 
       Mnif A, Loussaief H, Ben Hassine L, Chebil M, Ayed M. [Aspects of evolving urogenital tuberculosis. 60 cases].  Ann Urol (Paris) [Medline] 
       Beard CJ,  Lamb C,  Buswell L,  Schneider L,  Propert KJ,  Gladstone D, et al. Radiation-associated morbidity in patients undergoing small-field external beam irradiation for prostate cancer.  Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys [Medline] 
       Levenback C, Eifel PJ, Burke TW, Morris M, Gershenson DM. Hemorrhagic cystitis following radiotherapy for stage Ib cancer of the cervix.  Gynecol Oncol [Medline] 
       Wagenlehner FM,  van Till JW,  Magri V,  Perletti G,  Houbiers JG,  Weidner W, et al. National Institutes of Health Chronic Prostatitis Symptom Index (NIH-CPSI) symptom evaluation in multinational cohorts of patients with chronic prostatitis/chronic pelvic pain syndrome.  Eur Urol [Medline] 
       Shurbaji MS, Dumler JS, Gage WR, Pettis GL, Gupta PK, Kuhadja FP. Immunohistochemical detection of chlamydial antigens in association with cystitis.  Am J Clin Pathol [Medline] 
       Moussa OM, Eraky I, El-Far MA, Osman HG, Ghoneim MA. Rapid diagnosis of genitourinary tuberculosis by polymerase chain reaction and non-radioactive DNA hybridization.  J Urol [Medline] 
       Etienne M, Caron F. [Management of fungal urinary tract infections].  Presse Med [Medline] 
       Sandhu GS, Kline BC, Stockman L, Roberts GD. Molecular probes for diagnosis of fungal infections.  J Clin Microbiol [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Min JK,  Byun JY,  Lee SH,  Hong YS,  Park SH,  Cho CS, et al. Urinary bladder involvement in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus: with review of the literature.  Korean J Intern Med [Medline] 
       De Vinci C,  Pizza G,  Cuzzocrea D,  Menniti D,  Aiello E,  Maver P, et al. Use of transfer factor for the treatment of recurrent non-bacterial female cystitis (NBRC): a preliminary report.  Biotherapy [Medline] 
       Egli A,  Binggeli S,  Bodaghi S,  Dumoulin A,  Funk GA,  Khanna N, et al. Cytomegalovirus and polyomavirus BK posttransplant.  Nephrol Dial Transplant [Medline] 
       Xu HG,  Fang JP,  Huang SL,  Zhou DH,  Chen C,  Huang K, et al. [Risk factors and treatment of hemorrhagic cystitis in children after hematopoietic stem cell transplantation].  Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi [Medline] 
       Mott KE, Dixon H, Osei-Tutu E, England EC, Davis A. Effect of praziquantel on hematuria and proteinuria in urinary schistosomiasis.  Am J Trop Med Hyg [Medline] 
       Sommariva ML, Sandri SD, Ceriani V. Efficacy of sodium hyaluronate in the management of chemical and radiation cystitis.  Minerva Urol Nefrol [Medline] 
       Damiano R, Cicione A. The role of sodium hyaluronate and sodium chondroitin sulphate in the management of bladder disease.  Ther Adv Urol [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Allen S, Kilian C, Phelps J, et al. The use of hyperbaric oxygen for treating delayed radiation injuries in gynecologic malignancies: a review of literature and report of radiation injury incidence.  Support Care Cancer [Medline] 
       Del Pizzo JJ, Chew BH, Jacobs SC, Sklar GN. Treatment of radiation induced hemorrhagic cystitis with hyperbaric oxygen: long-term followup.  J Urol [Medline] 
       Chong KT, Hampson NB, Corman JM. Early hyperbaric oxygen therapy improves outcome for radiation-induced hemorrhagic cystitis.  Urology [Medline] 
       Srisupundit S, Kraiphibul P, Sangruchi S, Linasmita V, Chingskol K, Veerasarn V. The efficacy of chemically-stabilized chlorite-matrix (TCDO) in the management of late postradiation cystitis.  J Med Assoc Thai [Medline] 
       Ballen KK,  Becker P,  Levebvre K,  Emmons R,  Lee K,  Levy W, et al. Safety and cost of hyperhydration for the prevention of hemorrhagic cystitis in bone marrow transplant recipients.  Oncology [Medline]

Article 16:

   
     Thyroid-Stimulating Hormone 
       Thyroid-Stimulating Hormone: Reference Range, Interpretation, Collection and Panels 
       Thyroid-Stimulating Hormone: Reference Range, Interpretation, Collection and Panels 
       Overview Reference Range Interpretation Collection and Panels Background 
       Thyroid-Stimulating Hormone Overview 2074091-overview Jul 16, 2015 2015-08-10-12:31 1 Laboratory Medicine 2002 Laboratory Medicine Lab 
       1 2 content 2074091 505 1089 43 ssg 
     Aug 10, 2015 
       lab Laboratory Medicine 
       laboratory_medicine Laboratory Medicine 
       laboratory_medicine_labmed Laboratory Medicine thyroid-stimulating hormone, thyroid-stimulating hormone levels, TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone test, thyroid-stimulating hormone testing, thyroid, thyroid testing The lower limit of the reference range is 0.3-0. 0 Thyroid-Stimulating Hormone 
     Reference Range 
       Age-specific and pregnancy-specific reference intervals have been established. There are no significant sex or race specific differences. Expected values using a third-generation immunochemiluminometric assay are as follows: 
         Premature, 28-36 weeks (first week of life): 0.7-27.0 Cord blood (>37 wk): 2.3-13.2 Children 		 Birth to 4 days: 1-39 2-20 weeks: 1.7-9.1 21 weeks to 20 years:0.7-64 Adults 		 21-54 years: 0.4-4.2 55-87 years: 0.5-8.9  Pregnancy 		 First trimester: 0.3-4.5 Second trimester: 0.5-4.6 Third trimester: 0.8-5.2 The concentration of TSH in circulation is expressed as milli-international units of biological activity per liter of serum (mIU/L). This way of expressing the concentration originates from the way in which the TSH (and other hormones) was initially evaluated. TSH was initially measured using bioassay on colloidal tissue isolated from the guinea pig thyroid gland and an international unit was defined as the minimum amount of TSH that would elicit a biological response (stimulation of thyroid cAMP cyclase activity in these preparations). Currently all TSH assays are using WHO purified calibrators (second IRP 80/558), which have 7-5 pg purified human pituitary extract and are the equivalent of 37 mIU. (It should be noted that the pituitary extracts also contain small amounts of luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH): 5-5% LH and 2-77% FSH. [ 
     Interpretation 
       Conditions associated with increases in TSH include the following: 
         
           
             Congenital hypothyroidism 
           Primary  hypothyroidism 
           TSH-secreting pituitary tumors (uncommon) 
           Pituitary resistance to thyroid hormone (uncommon) 
         Typical Laboratory Results in the Progression of Hashimoto Thyroiditis from Subclinical to Overt Disease 
           
             Stage of Disease TSH fT4 T3 
           
             Subclinical Increased Normal concentrations Normal concentrations 
             Early Increased Decreased Normal concentrations 
             Mature Increased Decreased Decreased Conditions associated with decreases in TSH include the following: 
         
           
             Hyperthyroidism 
           Pituitary (secondary) hypothyroidism (rare) 
           Nonthyroid illness 
         Typical Laboratory Results in the Progression of Graves Disease from Subclinical to Overt Disease 
           
             Stage of Disease TSH fT4 T3 
           
             Subclinical Decreased Normal concentrations Normal concentrations 
             Early Decreased Normal concentrations Increased 
             Mature Decreased Increased Increased 
         Hypothyroidism Signs or symptoms of hypothyroidism include the following: 
         Weight gain Decreased appetite Dry skin Constipation Cold intolerance Puffy skin Hair loss Fatigue, lethargy Menstrual irregularity Blurred vision 
         Hyperthyroidism Signs or symptoms of hyperthyroidism include the following: 
         Nervousness Anxiety Increased perspiration Heat intolerance Weight loss despite increase appetite Hyperactivity Tremor Palpitations Oligomenorrhea Tachycardia or atrial arrhythmia Systolic hypertension Warm, moist, smooth skin Lid lag Stare Muscle weakness 
         Other considerations Drugs that can increase TSH include the following: 
         Dopamine antagonists Chlorpromazine Haloperidol Iodine-containing drugs Amiodarone (amiodarone-induced hypothyroidism)  Drugs that can decrease TSH include the following: 
         Exogenous thyroxine, Glucocorticoids Dopamine Levodopa Dopamine agonists Apomorphine Pyridoxine Amiodarone (early amiordarone therapy; amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis) 
     Collection and Panels 
       Preferred specimen and acceptable tubes: Serum (red top tube, SST) Plasma (green top tube - sodium heparin, ammonium heparin, lithium heparin; PST) Whole blood - newborn screening, collected by heel puncture 48-72 hours after birth Specimen volume: 0.5 mL plasma or serum (0.25 mL minimum volume) Specimen stability: Centrifuge specimens and remove serum or plasma from the cells within 2 hours of collection. Store at room temperature for 8 hours, or refrigerate at 2-8 degrees Celsius (36-46 degrees Fahrenheit) up to 5 days. If assays are not completed within 48 hours, or the separated sample is to be stored beyond 48 hours, samples should be frozen at -20 degrees Celsius or colder. Frozen samples should be thawed only once. Analyte deterioration may occur in samples that are repeatedly frozen or thawed. Related tests: Thyroxine Triiodothyronine (T3) Antithyroid autoantibodies Thyroxine binding proteins Thyroglobulin (Tg) Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) 
         Measurement of TSH There are two major ways in which TSH is currently evaluated: Radioimmunoassay (RIA) and chemiluminescence immunoassays. In the RIA, endogenous TSH present in the sample is competing with radiolabeled TSH for a limited amount of TSH-specific antibodies (“competitive assay”). The measured signal is inversely proportional with the amount of TSH present in the sample. [ The chemiluminescence assay is using two antibodies (“sandwich immunoassay”). The “capture antibody” is binding usually within the alpha subunit of TSH, while the “detection antibody” is always binding within the TSH-specific beta-subunit. The measured signal is directly proportional with the amount of TSH present in the sample. The chemiluminescence assay is significantly more sensitive than RIA; the current generation of immunometric assay (the fourth generation) has a functional detection limit of 0.001-0.002 mIU/L. [ As with all immunoassays, these assays are prone to specific interferences, especially heterophilic antibodies. Hook effect is rarely seen. Macro TSH can also be considered in the face of spurious results that do not match the clinical conditions and if other interferences are eliminated as well. 
     Background 
       Description Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) is produced by the adenohypophysis. It promotes development of the thyroid gland and maintenance of its normal function. TSH stimulates the thyroid to produce and release the thyroid hormones: T4 and T3 (hypothalamus-pituitary-thyroid axis). Measurement of TSH frequently is included with that of T4 and T3 in a laboratory panel to screen for and to evaluate thyroid disease. The diagnosis of thyroid disorders can be complex, requiring the combined results of thyroid testing. [ 
       Indications/Applications Indications for TSH testing include the following: 
         
           Screening for congenital hypothyroidism in newborns [ 
           Screening for subclinical hypothyroidism [ 
           Diagnosis and monitoring of other thyroid disorders 
           Monitoring of patients receiving thyroid hormone 
     
       Author 
         Alina G Sofronescu, PhD Assistant Professor, Board Certified Clinical Chemist, Technical Director of Clinical Chemistry Laboratory; Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical Center Alina G Sofronescu, PhD is a member of the following medical societies:  American Association for Clinical Chemistry Canadian Society of Clinical Chemists Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Chief Editor 
         Thomas M Wheeler, MD Chairman, Department of Pathology and Immunology, WL Moody, Jr, Professor of Pathology, Professor of Urology, Baylor College of Medicine Thomas M Wheeler, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  Alpha Omega Alpha American Association for Cancer Research American Medical Association American Society for Clinical Pathology American Society of Cytopathology American Thyroid Association American Urological Association College of American Pathologists United States and Canadian Academy of Pathology International Society of Urological Pathology Harris County Medical Society Disclosure: Received ownership interest from DNA SeqAlliance for board membership; Received stock from PathXL for medical advisory board. 
     
       Mitchell ML, Hsu HW, Sahai I. Changing perspectives in screening for congenital hypothyroidism and congenital adrenal hyperplasia.  Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes [Medline] 
       Leger J, Olivieri A, Donaldson M, et al. ESPE-PES-SLEP-JSPE-APEG-APPES-ISPAE, Congenital Hypothyroidism Consensus Conference Group. European Society for Paediatric Endocrinology consensus guidelines on screening, diagnosis, and management of congenital hypothyroidism.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab [Medline] 
       Lee SL. Hyperthyroidism.  Medscape Drugs & Diseases [Full Text] 
       Orlander PR. Hypothyroidism.  Medscape Drugs & Diseases [Full Text] 
       Burris CA, Ashwood ER, Burns DE.  Tietz Textbook of Clinical Chemistry and Molecular Diagnostics 
       McPherson RA, Matthew R. Pincus MR.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods 
       Wallach J.  Interpretation of Diagnostic Tests 
       Rugge JB, Bougatsos C, Chou R. Screening and treatment of thyroid dysfunction: an evidence review for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.  Ann Intern Med [Medline] 
       Gaines Das RE, Bristow AF. The Second International Reference Preparation of Thyroid-Stimulating Hormone, Human, for Immunoassay: calibration by bioassay and immunoassay in an international collaborative study.  J Endocrinol [Medline] 
       William Clarke, ed.  Contemporary Practice in Clinical Chemistry

Article 17:

   
     Management of the Dental Patient With Neurological Disease 
       Management of the Dental Patient With Neurological Disease: Overview, Epilepsy, Stroke 
       Management of the Dental Patient With Neurological Disease: Overview, Epilepsy, Stroke 
       Overview Overview Epilepsy Stroke Parkinson Disease Myasthenia Gravis Facial Paralysis 
       Management of the Dental Patient With Neurological Disease Overview 2091727-overview May 23, 2013 2015-08-03-18:09 1 Dentistry 2002 Diseases & Conditions Condition 
       1 2 content 2091727 502 3029823 49 ssg 
     Jun 04, 2015 
       condition Diseases & Conditions 
       dentistry Dentistry 
       dentistry_misc Miscellaneous Topics in Dentistry dental treatment, dental management, neurologic disease with dental treatment, dental management of Parkinson's disease, dental management of Parkinson disease, dental management of myasthenia gravis, dental management of epilepsy, stroke, dental management of the stroke patient, convulsions, seizures, Parkinson disease, Parkinson's disease, myasthenia gravis, epilepsy Patients with neurological disease require special management considerations. These include pretreatment treatment planning, therapeutic techniques, and posttreatment requirements. 0 Management of the Dental Patient With Neurological Disease 
     Overview 
       Patients with neurological disease require special management considerations. These include pretreatment treatment planning, therapeutic techniques, and posttreatment requirements. Neurologic conditions facing the dentist include abnormalities associated with the cranial nerves, facial sensory loss, facial paralysis, and conditions such as epilepsy, Parkinson disease, multiple sclerosis, stroke, and myasthenia gravis. In this article, strategies for managing patients with some of these conditions are presented. [ 
     Epilepsy 
       Epilepsy describes a set of conditions associated with paroxysmal neurologic function observed as seizures that include convulsive and other neurosensory disturbances. About 10% of the population is estimated to have epilepsy. The clinical signs associated with tonic-clonic convulsions are quite distinctive and can be disconcerting to dental personnel when confronted with the situation while the patient is in the dental chair. To eliminate potential treatment issues, guidelines are presented below. [ 
       Prior to and during dental treatment Ensure the patient has been compliant with medication coverage. If there are any questions regarding compliance, contact the patient’s physician.  Ascertain that the patient has no toxicity with the medication taken and that mental function is normal. Patients taking valproic acid (Depakene) may have increased bleeding during procedures. If there are acknowledged problems, order a bleeding time assessment prior to treatment and consult with a physician if the values are questionable.  During dental treatment, be aware that a grand mal seizure could occur. If a seizure occurs, place the chair back to a supine position, turn the patient to the side, and keep the patient comfortable without restraint until it has passed. Placement of a tongue blade is not recommended unless the patient is aware of an impending seizure and can assist in its placement.  If injury to the lip or tongue occurs during a seizure, appropriate treatment such as suturing of lacerations, localization of potential fractures, removal of fragments, and follow-up dental treatment is required.  If dental treatment necessitates the replacement of one or more missing teeth, restoration of the missing teeth using fixed appliances is preferable over removal-type prosthetics. In addition, the clinician needs to be cognizant of potential fracture of anterior full-coverage restorations such as complete porcelain crowns. It may be preferable to use three-quarter gold crowns with porcelain veneers if concern exists regarding the frequency of seizures.  
       Oral medicine aspects Monitor gingival hyperplasia secondary to the use of anticonvulsant medication (eg, phenytoin). Monitor oral hygiene and provide educational information and training to facilitate the patient’s ability to manage his or her oral health effectively; evidence suggests meticulous oral hygiene may reduce or prevent gingival hyperplasia.  Subluxation of the temporomandibular joint can occur during seizure episodes. No specific treatment is necessary unless this results in joint hypermobility and subsequent frequent nonseizure subluxation.  
     Stroke 
       A neurovascular accident (stroke) is often fatal but may be precipitated by multiple non–life-threatening events that if identified, can reduce the risk of an acute and serious outcome when the patient is in dental treatment. Knowing the clinical signs and symptoms of a stroke is important in managing older patients with longstanding cardiovascular disease. [ 
       Prior to and during dental treatment The clinician should be aware that patients with longstanding hypertension and cerebrovascular disease are at increased risk of a cerebrovascular accident. Stroke is the third most common cause of death in the United States.  The signs of a stroke can be quite subtle. A major event may be associated with many transient ischemic attacks (TIAs), or minor strokes, that last for a few minutes. In a TIA, dizziness, diplopia, hemiplegia, and altered speech may occur. A thorough history of possible patient symptoms prior to treatment may provide useful information regarding the possibility of an impending major event during treatment, as several TIAs occurring close together often precede a major stroke. This is important because the clinician should be aware that a patient experiencing a minor event in the office may have a major event after leaving the office, leading to mortality.  The warning signs of a severe stroke event include sudden or temporary weakness or numbness of the face and other body parts, loss of speech or difficulty speaking or understanding speech, visual changes, and unexplained loss of balance or dizziness.  In patients with an identified increased risk of stroke pretreatment or who exhibit signs of a mild TIA occurring during treatment, a follow-up phone call is recommended. Any patient exhibiting signs or symptoms of a TIA or stroke requires immediate medical referral.  If an obvious stroke has occurred during a dental procedure, the patient’s airway must be maintained until emergency medical personnel arrive.  
       Dental treatment of patients with stroke residual In patients who have experienced physical deficits (eg, hand-eye coordination problems, arm or hand deficit, masticatory muscle weakness), personal oral hygiene efforts may be compromised. Treatment planning should include the following:  
         
           Comprehensive oral hygiene instruction that may include instruction on use of an electric toothbrush or a large hand-held toothbrush or water irrigation instrument coupled with plaque-revealing tablets; running a washcloth through the vestibule can help to reduce accumulation of food matter  
           Recommendation regarding anticaries preparations, including rinses containing fluoride and xylitol or the use of xylitol lozenges (eg, XyliMelts) to help reduce the oral bacterial burden of  Streptococcus mutans 
           The possible need for an antifungal prescription, as the accumulation of saliva in patients with facial palsy may be problematic at the corners of the mouth and can predispose the patient to fungal infection  
           Awareness that depending on the type of stroke, the poststroke patient may have been prescribed anticoagulant medication 
     Parkinson Disease 
       Parkinson disease, resulting from the degeneration of cells in the substantia nigra, causes a number of motor symptoms that can complicate dental management. These include tremors, involuntary movements, facial and limb rigidity, bradykinesia (particularly as it relates to swallowing), and akathisia (ie, restlessness). During dental treatment, these disabilities must be taken into consideration. Following is a list of specific recommendations for managing the dental patient with Parkinson disease. [ 
       Predental treatment The same oral hygiene information should be offered to the Parkinson disease patient as the stroke patient. Recommend the use of an electric toothbrush or a large hand-held toothbrush or water irrigation instrument coupled with plaque-revealing tablets. Running a washcloth through the vestibule can help to reduce accumulation of food matter.  Patients with Parkinson disease may not be able to effectively communicate their needs, so a family member or caregiver should be present when the treatment plan is presented to the patient. If there is cognitive decline, this is particularly important to ensure understanding in full of the risks and benefits of proposed intervention (eg, multiple extractions, periodontal treatment).  
       Dental treatment recommendations Severe tremors and involuntary jaw and limb movements can present difficulty in the management of the patient. This is particularly true for the patient in whom the medication dosage is incorrect or in whom medication has not been completely effective. To gain the maximum benefit from prescribed drugs, patients should be instructed to take prescribed medication as scheduled, and dentistry appointments should be made within a short time frame following their use.  Since facial musculature tonicity associated with Parkinson disease can lead to the patient’s inability to express emotion, it is important for the treating clinician to be sympathetic and attentive to eye or other limb movements that could suggest pain during a procedure.  Bradykinesia that causes swallowing difficulty is also a potential problem for Parkinson disease patients during treatment. Adequate suction of fluid is imperative during dental procedures, including those involving dental hygiene.  Temperature regulation may be compromised if the patient has comorbid Shy-Drager disease (an abnormality of the autonomic nervous system); placement of a blanket over the patient may help maintain warmth.  Dental reconstruction that involves the occlusal surfaces needs to be tailored to the fact that bruxism may be severe in patients with Parkinson disease. The occlusion of placed restorations should be kept as flat as possible to avoid breakage of the restoration or teeth.  Care should be taken to not overstress the patient with Parkinson disease. Short appointments are helpful. The patient with Parkinson disease may have difficulty placing an oral sleep-apnea appliance. This approach to the management of sleep apnea is discouraged. If apnea is a confounding problem, medical consultation is required and use of a continuous positive-airway pressure (CPAP) device should be considered.  Some Parkinson patients develop temporomandibular joint problems, particularly hypermobility of the mandible and frequent subluxation. This is a difficult problem to treat if the patient also has comorbid severe bruxism. In some cases, patients benefit from Herbst appliances with strong elastics worn at night. However, the problem of patient placement in the face of muscle rigidity and bradykinesia is also a concern in these cases.  
     Myasthenia Gravis 
       Myasthenia gravis results in generalized muscle weakness, including the muscles of the face, tongue, and neck. Patients with myasthenia gravis may hold their jaws in a slack position with the mouth open. The problem becomes worse towards the end of the day and with fatigue or stress. [ 
       Dental considerations Dental treatment should be scheduled at a time when the patient is not fatigued, and preferably during remission of the disease. Appointments need to be made 1-2 hours after the patient has taken his or her medication (an anticholinesterase, eg, pyridostigmine), preferably in the morning.  Consideration should be made for reducing stress prior to and during the dental appointment. Anxious patients may benefit from a low dose of an anxiolytic benzodiazepine such as such as diazepam (Valium) or lorazepam (Ativan) taken prior to treatment.  Procaine anesthetics should not be used for local anesthesia. In the patient with a dental abscess, only the antibiotics penicillin or erythromycin can be safely used to treat infection. Drugs to be avoided include the tetracyclines, clindamycin, lincomycin, sulphonamides, and aminoglycosides. For pain, paracetamol coupled with a narcotic (eg, codeine) may be helpful. Aspirin has been associated with cholinergic crisis in patients taking anticholinesterases, so it should be avoided.  Since patients with myasthenia gravis often have impaired respiration, special consideration needs to be taken for maintaining oxygenation during procedures involving conscious sedation. In fact, it is best to treat these patients in an inpatient hospital setting. The drugs often used in conscious sedation (eg, opioids, barbiturates) may potentiate or aggravate breathing difficulty in myasthenia gravis patients.  
     Facial Paralysis 
       Conditions causing loss of function of the seventh cranial nerve include multiple sclerosis, infection (eg, syphilis, HIV disease, Lyme disease, leprosy), sarcoidosis, cholesteatoma, Bell palsy, and several intracranial problems (eg, tumor, trauma). Upper and lower motor neuron abnormality can be differentiated by the resulting loss of function. Many of these conditions affect oral health. [ 
       Dental considerations Loss of taste can occur and is associated with abnormality of the chorda tympani. In cases involving Bell palsy, the corneas should be protected during dental treatment. In other cases of facial palsy, there may be accumulation of food debris, potentially increasing dental plaque. Patients should be instructed in techniques to be used after eating aimed at eliminating the material.  Leaking of saliva at the corners of the mouth may predispose the patient to angular cheilitis. An antifungal cream appropriately placed may be useful if fungal infection emerges.  Placement of a splint may be helpful in improving facial aesthetics. Other approaches may include appliances anchored to the teeth. Suturing may also be useful.  Pain in the region of the ear/temporomandibular joint may be the result of inflammation of the geniculate ganglia of the facial nerve. Avoidance of misdiagnosis (temporomandibular joint pathology) is important.  Facial dyskinesias can lead to tongue or jaw movement that can confound dental treatment. Bruxism can lead to tooth wear or fracture. Patients with facial dyskinesias may benefit from predental treatment prescription of a benzodiazepine.  Sensory deficits associated with conditions involving the fifth cranial nerve may be the result of conditions such as Paget disease or peripheral lesions involving the bones and the canals.  Brain stem lesions can affect mastication and cause mouth-opening difficulty. Facial paralysis can result from alveolar nerve blocks. In some cases, this can be permanent. 
     
       Author 
         Jeff Burgess, DDS, MSD (Retired) Clinical Assistant Professor, Department of Oral Medicine, University of Washington School of Dental Medicine; (Retired) Attending in Pain Center, University of Washington Medical Center; (Retired) Private Practice in Hawaii and Washington; Director, Oral Care Research Associates Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Chief Editor 
         Arlen D Meyers, MD, MBA Professor of Otolaryngology, Dentistry, and Engineering, University of Colorado School of Medicine Arlen D Meyers, MD, MBA is a member of the following medical societies:  American Academy of Facial Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery American Academy of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery American Head and Neck Society Disclosure: Serve(d) as a director, officer, partner, employee, advisor, consultant or trustee for: Medvoy;Testappropriate;Cerescan;Empirican;RxRevu<br/>Received none from Allergy Solutions, Inc for board membership; Received honoraria from RxRevu for chief medical editor; Received salary from Medvoy for founder and president; Received consulting fee from Corvectra for senior medical advisor; Received ownership interest from Cerescan for consulting; Received consulting fee from Essiahealth for advisor; Received consulting fee from Carespan for advisor; Received consulting fee from Covidien for consulting. 
     
       Scully C, Cawson RA, eds. Neurologic disease and facial pain.  Medical Problems in Dentistry 
       Reid AY, Metcalfe A, Patten SB, Wiebe S, Macrodimitris S, Jetté N. Epilepsy is associated with unmet health care needs compared to the general population despite higher health resource utilization--a Canadian population-based study.  Epilepsia [Medline] 
       Kosyfaki P, Woerner W, Att W. Prosthodontic treatment in a partially edentulous patient with a complex medical history of epilepsy and deep vein thrombosis: a case report.  Quintessence Int [Medline] 
       Capp PL, de Faria ME, Siqueira SR, Cillo MT, Prado EG, de Siqueira JT. Special care dentistry: Midazolam conscious sedation for patients with neurological diseases.  Eur J Paediatr Dent [Medline] 
       Ferreira MC, Guare RO, Prokopowitsch I, Santos MT. Prevalence of dental trauma in individuals with special needs.  Dent Traumatol [Medline] 
       Alaali Y, Barnes GD, Froehlich JB, Kaatz S. Management of oral anticoagulation in patients undergoing minor dental procedures.  J Mich Dent Assoc [Medline] 
       Asberg KH, Wertsén M, Wårdh I. [Impaired oral health after stroke a growing problem. Increased cooperation between care and dental care a possible factor of progress].  Lakartidningen [Medline] 
       McCreary C, Ní Ríordáin R. Oral medicine and the elderly.  Dent Update [Medline] 
       McCreary C, Ni Riordáin R. Systemic diseases and the elderly.  Dent Update [Medline] 
       Chávez EM, Ship JA. Sensory and motor deficits in the elderly: impact on oral health.  J Public Health Dent [Medline] 
       Grover S, Rhodus NL. Dental management of Parkinson's disease.  Northwest Dent [Medline] 
       DeBowes SL, Tolle SL, Bruhn AM. Parkinson's disease: considerations for dental hygienists.  Int J Dent Hyg [Medline] 
       Friedlander AH, Mahler M, Norman KM, Ettinger RL. Parkinson disease: systemic and orofacial manifestations, medical and dental management.  J Am Dent Assoc [Medline] 
       Hockstein NG, Samadi DS, Gendron K, Handler SD. Sialorrhea: a management challenge.  Am Fam Physician [Medline] 
       Brailsford SR, Fiske J, Gilbert S, Clark D, Beighton D. The effects of the combination of chlorhexidine/thymol- and fluoride-containing varnishes on the severity of root caries lesions in frail institutionalised elderly people.  J Dent [Medline] 
       Lotia S, Randall C, Dawson LJ, Longman LP. Dental management of the myasthenic patient.  Dent Update [Medline] 
       Tolle L. Myasthenia gravis: a review for dental hygienists.  J Dent Hyg [Medline] 
       Yarom N, Barnea E, Nissan J, Gorsky M. Dental management of patients with myasthenia gravis: a literature review.  Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod [Medline] 
       Patil PM, Singh G, Patil SP. Dentistry and the myasthenia gravis patient: a review of the current state of the art.  Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol [Medline] 
       Pregerson B. Myasthenia Gravis In Elderly Man With Slurred Speech. ConsultantLive.com. Available at  http://www.consultantlive.com/nervous-system-diseases/content/article/10162/2111633 
       Bagchi G, Nath DK. Restoration of facial symmetry in a patient with bell palsy using a modified maxillary complete denture: a case report.  Int J Prosthodont [Medline] 
       Pereira FP, Guskuma MH, Luvizuto ER, Faco EF, Magro-Filho O, Hochuli-Vieira E. Unilateral facial paralysis caused by Ramsay Hunt syndrome.  J Craniofac Surg [Medline] 
       Selvi F, Guven E, Mutlu D. Clinical management of microstomia due to the static treatment of facial paralysis and oral rehabilitation with dental implants.  J Craniofac Surg [Medline] 
       Chevalier V, Arbab-Chirani R, Tea SH, Roux M. Facial palsy after inferior alveolar nerve block: case report and review of the literature.  Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg [Medline] 
       Sajjan MC, Krishna RG. Lip-support prosthesis--a unique approach in management of bilateral facial palsy.  Quintessence Int [Medline]

Article 18:

   
     Creatinine Clearance 
       Creatinine Clearance: Reference Range, Interpretation, Collection and Panels 
       Creatinine Clearance: Reference Range, Interpretation, Collection and Panels 
       Overview Reference Range Interpretation Collection and Panels Background 
       Creatinine Clearance Overview 2117892-overview May 07, 2013 2015-06-20-05:10 1 Laboratory Medicine 2002 Laboratory Medicine Lab 
       1 2 content 2117892 505 43 age12 
     Jun 04, 2015 
       lab Laboratory Medicine 
       laboratory_medicine Laboratory Medicine 
       laboratory_medicine_labmed Laboratory Medicine creatinine clearance, creatinine, creatinine lab test, creatinine lab testing, creatinine test, glomerular filtration rate, GFR, heart failure, renal failure, hypoperfusion, hypovolemic shock, azotemia, chronic kidney disease Serum Male serum reference ranges are as follows: Infant - Not established Age 1-2 years - 0.1–0. 0 Creatinine Clearance 
     Reference Range 
       Serum Male serum reference ranges are as follows: 
         
           Infant - Not established 
           Age 1-2 years - 0.1–0.4 mg/dL 
           Age 3-4 years - 0.1–0.5 mg/dL 
           Age 5-9 years - 0.2-0.6 mg/dL 
           Age 10-11 years - 0.3-0.7 mg/dL 
           Age 12-13 years - 0.4-0.8 mg/dL 
           Age 14-15 years - 0.5-0.9 mg/dL 
           Age 16 years or older - 0.8-1.3 mg/dL Female serum reference ranges are as follows: 
         
           Infant - Not established 
           Age 1-3 years - 0.1–0.4 mg/dL 
           Age 4-5 years - 0.2–0.5 mg/dL 
           Age 6-8 years - 0.3-0.6 mg/dL 
           Age 9-15 years - 0.4-0.7 mg/dL 
           Age 16 years or older - 0.6-1.1 mg/dL 
       Urine The normal range for a 24-hour urine creatinine level is 500-2000 mg/day. 
     Interpretation 
       Creatinine clearance is a widely used value to estimate the glomerular filtration rate (GFR). [ Decrease in creatinine clearance indicates decreased GFR and impaired renal function. [ [ [ Increased creatinine clearance is often called hyperfiltration and is usually seen during pregnancy or in patients with diabetes mellitus before diabetic nephropathy has occurred. It may also occur with large dietary protein intake or with plasma volume expansion. [ For more information, see the Medscape Reference topics  Chronic Kidney Disease Acute Renal Failure Heart Failure Hypovolemic Shock Azotemia 
     Collection and Panels 
       Both serum and urine are needed. Serum collection must be obtained within 24 hours of the urine collection.  
       Serum specimen See the list below: 
         
           Container/tube: Red top or serum gel 
           Specimen volume: 1 mL, minimum volume 0.5 mL 
           Collection instructions: Label specimen serum 
           Specimen stability: Refrigerated (preferred), frozen 
         Urine specimen [ 
         
           Container: Plastic urine container, with or without 6N HCl 
           Specimen volume: 10-mL aliquot of entire collection 
           Minimum volume: 0.5-mL aliquot 
           Special instructions: Record total 24-hour urine volume on the request form 
           Collection instructions: Instruct the patient to void at 8 AM and discard the specimen; then, collect all urine, including the final specimen voided at the end of the 24-hour collection period (ie, 8 AM the next morning). Secure the container and send it to the laboratory  Note: samples with gross hemolysis and gross lipemia are rejected. 
     Background 
       Glomerular filtration rate (GFR) is most commonly assessed via creatinine clearance. The test requires measurement of serum creatinine, urine creatinine, and 24-hour urine volume. Creatinine is a product of the metabolism of dietary meat and creatine in skeletal muscle. With the exception of extreme muscle exertion or muscle breakdown (rhabdomyolysis), creatinine has a stable plasma concentration and is released into the circulation at a relatively constant rate.  Creatinine is freely filtered across the glomerulus; the kidney does not reabsorb or metabolize creatinine. The proximal tubules secrete approximately 15% of urinary creatinine in patients with a normal GFR. In patients with declining renal function, a progressively higher percentage is secreted. The net effect is progressive overestimation of the GFR, with more severe loss of renal function.  Ignoring proximal tubular secretion, all of the filtered creatinine (the GFR product and the serum creatinine concentration) is excreted (equal to product of the urine creatinine concentration [UCr] and the urine flow rate or volume [V]).  This can be expressed as follows: 
         
           GFR x serum creatinine concentration = UCr x V 
           GFR = [UCr x V]/serum creatinine concentration The formula provides the creatinine clearance; however, this formula tends to overestimate the real GFR by approximately 15% percent. [ To maximize accuracy, the creatinine clearance is usually determined from a 24-hour urine collection. Shorter-timed collections are less accurate owing to bladder retention and variability in creatinine excretion. See the formula below:  
         
           Creatinine clearance - 70-135 mL/min/surface area (surface area) In adults younger than 50 years, daily creatinine clearance is 20-25 mg/kg ideal body weight in males and 15-20 mg/kg ideal body weight in females. In adults older than 50 years, daily creatinine clearance decreases progressively owing to reduction in muscle mass.  If the GFR suddenly decreases by 50%, the kidneys transiently filter and excrete only half as much creatinine, causing accumulation of creatinine in the body fluids and raising plasma concentrations. Plasma concentrations of creatinine continue to rise until the filtered load of creatinine (P Cr Cr If the GFR falls to one fourth of normal, plasma creatinine increases to about 4 times normal and a decrease of the GFR to one eighth of normal would raise plasma creatinine to 8 times normal. Thus, under steady-state conditions, the creatinine excretion rate equals the rate of creatinine production, despite reductions in the GFR. However, this normal rate of creatinine excretion occurs at the expense of elevated plasma creatinine concentration. [ Ideally, inulin clearance is an accurate measure of GFR/creatinine clearance. It is freely filtered and not reabsorbed or secreted by the kidneys. However, the main limiting factor is to administer it intravenously. [ Other substances that can be used are radioactive iothalamate creatinine. [ The combined creatinine–cystatin C equation performed better than equations based on either of these markers alone and may be useful as a confirmatory test for chronic kidney disease. [ 
       Indications/Applications To assess renal function using the GFR 
       Limitations Accurate results depend on accurately timed and complete collection. Incomplete urine collections result in underestimation of creatinine excretion and, therefore GFR.  One of the major limitations of creatinine clearance testing is that it becomes less accurate as the GFR declines because of increasing tubular secretion of creatinine. This results in the GFR being overestimated.  Sex and race can alter creatinine clearance. Women have lower serum creatinine values because they have less muscle mass and a lower rate of creatinine production. Lower values for Latinos and higher values for blacks probably indicate greater and lesser muscle mass and creatinine production, respectively.  Creatinine production differs over time. Individuals with significant variations in dietary intake (eg, vegetarian diet, creatine supplementation) or reduction in muscle mass (eg, amputation, muscle wasting, malnutrition) produce different amounts of creatinine than the general population. Amputees have reduced creatinine production proportional to the amount of muscle removed (eg, a lower extremity is more significant than an upper extremity).  Some drugs can increase the serum creatinine level by decreasing creatinine secretion. These drugs include trimethoprim (which is usually combined with sulfamethoxazole) [ In advanced kidney failure, extrarenal intestinal creatinine elimination increases. The serum creatinine concentration is lower than would be expected from the GFR as a result of the intestinal bacterial overgrowth and increased bacterial creatininase activity.  The colorimetric serum creatinine assay (alkaline picrate method) cross-reacts with noncreatinine chromogens, particularly acetoacetate in patients with  diabetic ketoacidosis 
     start media 
       
         Serum Vacuette 6-mL tube.  Serum Vacuette 6-mL tube.  
     
       Author 
         Rakesh Vadde, MBBS Fellow in Pulmonary Medicine, Interfaith Medical Center Rakesh Vadde, MBBS is a member of the following medical societies:  American College of Chest Physicians American College of Physicians American Thoracic Society Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Coauthor(s) 
         M Frances J Schmidt, MD Chief of Pulmonary Medicine, Pulmonary Fellowship Program, Teaching Attending Physician, Department of Medicine, Interfaith Medical Center M Frances J Schmidt, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American College of Chest Physicians American College of Physicians Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
         Bikash Bhattarai, MD Fellow in Pulmonary Medicine, Interfaith Medical Center Bikash Bhattarai, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American College of Chest Physicians American College of Physicians American Thoracic Society Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Chief Editor 
         Eric B Staros, MD Associate Professor of Pathology, St Louis University School of Medicine; Director of Clinical Laboratories, Director of Cytopathology, Department of Pathology, St Louis University Hospital Eric B Staros, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American Medical Association American Society for Clinical Pathology College of American Pathologists Association for Molecular Pathology Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
     
       Rose BD, Post TW.  Clinical Physiology of Acid-Base and Electrolyte Disorders 
       Perrone RD, Madias NE, Levey AS. Serum creatinine as an index of renal function: new insights into old concepts.  Clin Chem [Medline] 
       Kim KE, Onesti G, Ramirez O, Brest AN, Swartz C. Creatinine clearance in renal disease. A reappraisal.  Br Med J [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Levey AS. Measurement of renal function in chronic renal disease.  Kidney Int [Medline] 
       Stevens LA, Levey AS. Measured GFR as a confirmatory test for estimated GFR.  J Am Soc Nephrol [Medline] 
       Lubowitz H, Slatopolsky E, Shankel S, Rieselbach RE, Bricker NS. Glomerular filtration rate. Determination in patients with chronic renal disease.  JAMA [Medline] 
       Walser M. Creatinine excretion as a measure of protein nutrition in adults of varying age.  JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr [Medline] 
       Levey AS, Perrone RD, Madias NE. Serum creatinine and renal function.  Annu Rev Med [Medline] 
       van Acker BA, Koomen GC, Koopman MG, de Waart DR, Arisz L. Creatinine clearance during cimetidine administration for measurement of glomerular filtration rate.  Lancet [Medline] 
       Guyton AC, Hall JE.  Gutyon and Hall Textbook of Medical Physiology 
       Inker LA, Schmid CH, Tighiouart H, et al. Estimating glomerular filtration rate from serum creatinine and cystatin C.  N Engl J Med [Medline] 
       Dunn SR, Gabuzda GM, Superdock KR, Kolecki RS, Schaedler RW, Simenhoff ML. Induction of creatininase activity in chronic renal failure: timing of creatinine degradation and effect of antibiotics.  Am J Kidney Dis [Medline] 
       Mayo Medical Laboratories. Creatinine Clearance. Available at  http://www.mayomedicallaboratories.com/test-info/pediatric/refvalues/reference.php?unit_code=8500

Article 19:

   
     CHADS2 Score for Stroke Risk Assessment in Atrial Fibrillation 
       CHADS2 Score for Stroke Risk Assessment in Atrial Fibrillation: CHADS2 Score for Stroke Risk Assessment in Atrial Fibrillation 
       CHADS2 Score for Stroke Risk Assessment in Atrial Fibrillation: CHADS2 Score for Stroke Risk Assessment in Atrial Fibrillation 
       Overview CHADS2 Score for Stroke Risk Assessment in Atrial Fibrillation 
       CHADS2 Score for Stroke Risk Assessment in Atrial Fibrillation Overview 2172597-overview May 20, 2014 2015-06-05-21:04 1 Protocols 2002 Tables & Protocols Table 
       1 2 content 2172597 508 390 2 ssg 
     Jun 04, 2015 
       table Tables & Protocols 
       protocols Protocols 
       protocols_protocols Tables and Protocols First published in 2001, the CHADS-2 index (congestive heart failure, hypertension, age =75 years, diabetes mellitus, stroke) was developed to more accurately predict the risk of stroke in patients with nonvalvular atrial fibrillation. The index was derived by combining risk factors from prior studies and then testing their validity in a coho... 0 CHADS2 Score for Stroke Risk Assessment in Atrial Fibrillation 
     CHADS2 Score for Stroke Risk Assessment in Atrial Fibrillation 
       First published in 2001, the CHADS-2 index (congestive heart failure, hypertension, age =75 years, diabetes mellitus, stroke) was developed to more accurately predict the risk of stroke in patients with nonvalvular  atrial fibrillation [ [ 
         Table 1. CHADS 2 
           
             
               
                 Score  
               
                 CHADS 2 
             
               1 point 
               Congestive heart failure 
             
               1 point 
               Hypertension 
             
               1 point 
               Age >75 years 
             
               1 point 
               Diabetes mellitus 
             
               2 points 
               Stroke/transient ischemic attack 
         Table 2. Treatment Recommendations Based on CHADS 2 
           
             
               
                 CHADS 2 
               
                 Risk  
               
                 Recommendation  
             
               0 
               Low 
               Aspirin (81-325 mg) daily 
             
               1 
               Intermediate 
               Aspirin (81-325 mg) daily or warfarin (INR 2.0–3.0), based on patient preference 
             
               2 or more 
               High (CHADS 2 2 
               Warfarin (INR 2.0-3.0), unless there are reasons to avoid it 
         Table 3. CHADS 2 
           
             
               
                 CHADS 2 
               
                 Annual Stroke Risk, %  
             
               0 
               1.9 
             
               1 
               2.8 
             
               2 
               4 
             
               3 
               5.9 
             
               4 
               8.5 
             
               5 
               12.5 
             
               6 
               18.2 See also Medscape's  Atrial Fibrillation CHADS2 Score for Stroke Risk 
     
       Author 
         Ethan Levine, DO Director of Cardiac Electrophysiology, Arnot Ogden Medical Center Ethan Levine, DO is a member of the following medical societies:  American College of Cardiology American Heart Association Heart Rhythm Society Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
     
       Gage BF, Waterman AD, Shannon W, Boechler M, Rich MW, Radford MJ. Validation of clinical classification schemes for predicting stroke: results from the National Registry of Atrial Fibrillation.  JAMA [Medline] 
       Atrial Fibrillation investigators. Risk factors for stroke and efficacy of antithrombotic therapy in atrial fibrillation. Analysis of pooled data from five randomized controlled trials.  Arch Intern Med [Medline] 
       Stroke Prevention Atrial Fibrillation III Writing Committee. Patients with nonvalvular atrial fibrillation at low risk of stroke during treatment with aspirin: Stroke Prevention in Atrial Fibrillation III Study. The SPAF III Writing Committee for the Stroke Prevention in Atrial Fibrillation Investigators.  JAMA [Medline]

Article 20:

   
     Hyponatremia 
       Hyponatremia: Practice Essentials, Background, Pathophysiology Hyponatremia Clinical Presentation: History, Physical, Causes Hyponatremia Differential Diagnoses Hyponatremia Workup: Laboratory Studies, Imaging Studies Hyponatremia Treatment & Management: Approach Considerations, Medical Care, Diet Hyponatremia Medication: Diuretics, Antibiotics, Arginine Vasopressin Antagonists Hyponatremia Follow-up: Further Inpatient Care, Complications, Prognosis 
       Hyponatremia: Practice Essentials, Background, Pathophysiology Hyponatremia Clinical Presentation: History, Physical, Causes Hyponatremia Differential Diagnoses Hyponatremia Workup: Laboratory Studies, Imaging Studies Hyponatremia Treatment & Management: Approach Considerations, Medical Care, Diet Hyponatremia Medication: Diuretics, Antibiotics, Arginine Vasopressin Antagonists Hyponatremia Follow-up: Further Inpatient Care, Complications, Prognosis 
       Overview
 Practice Essentials Background Pathophysiology Frequency Mortality/Morbidity Presentation
 History Physical Causes Differential Diagnoses
 Workup
 Laboratory Studies Imaging Studies Treatment
 Approach Considerations Medical Care Diet Medication
 Follow-up
 Further Inpatient Care Complications Prognosis Patient Education 
       Hyponatremia Overview Hyponatremia Clinical Presentation Hyponatremia Differential Diagnoses Hyponatremia Workup Hyponatremia Treatment Hyponatremia Medication Hyponatremia Follow-up 242166-overview Jul 09, 2015 2015-08-13-17:23 0 Nephrology 2002 Diseases & Conditions Condition 
       1 2 content 242166 502 678 44 ssg 
     Jul 09, 2015 
       condition Diseases & Conditions 
       nephrology Nephrology 
       nephrology_acid-base Acid-Base, Fluid, and Electrolyte Disorders hyponatremia, SIADH, electrolyte, electrolytes, electrolyte imbalance, sodium deficiency, furosemide, hypertonic hyponatremia, hyponatraemia, hyponatremia treatment, hyponatremia causes, hyponatremia correction, tolvaptan, conivaptan, cerebral salt wasting, normotonic hyponatremia, hypotonic hyponatremia, normovolemic hypotonic hyponatremia, euvolemic hypotonic hyponatremiaabnormal electrolyte level, abnormal electrolyte distribution, congestive heart failure, liver failure, renal failure, hyperlipidemia, paraproteinemia, pseudohyponatremia, liver cirrhosis, nephrotic syndrome, severe hypoproteinemia, syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion, severe hypothyroidism, adrenal insufficiency Hyponatremia is defined as a serum sodium level of less than 135 mEq/L and is considered severe when the serum level is below 125 mEq/L. Many medical illnesses, such as congestive heart failure, liver failure, renal failure, or pneumonia, may be associated with hyponatremia. 0 Hyponatremia 
     Overview 
       Practice Essentials 
         Hyponatremia is defined as a serum sodium level of less than 135 mEq/L and is considered severe when the serum level is below 125 mEq/L. Many medical illnesses, such as congestive heart failure, liver failure, renal failure, or pneumonia, may be associated with hyponatremia. 
         Signs and symptoms Symptoms range from nausea and malaise, with mild reduction in the serum sodium, to lethargy, decreased level of consciousness, headache, and (if severe) seizures and coma. Overt neurologic symptoms most often are due to very low serum sodium levels (usually < 115 mEq/L), resulting in intracerebral osmotic fluid shifts and brain edema. Hyponatremia is classified according to volume status, as follows: 
           
             Hypovolemic hyponatremia: decrease in total body water with greater decrease in total body sodium 
             Euvolemic hyponatremia: normal body sodium with increase in total body water 
             Hypervolemic hyponatremia: increase in total body sodium with greater increase in total body water Hyponatremia can be further subclassified according to effective osmolality, as follows: 
           
             Hypotonic hyponatremia 
             Isotonic hyponatremia 
             Hypertonic hyponatremia See  Clinical Presentation 
         Diagnosis There are three essential laboratory tests in the evaluation of patients with hyponatremia that, together with the history and the physical examination, help to establish the primary underlying etiologic mechanism: urine osmolality, serum osmolality, and urinary sodium concentration. 
           Urine osmolality Urine osmolality helps differentiate between conditions associated with impaired free-water excretion and primary polydipsia. A urine osmolality greater than 100 mOsm/kg indicates impaired ability of the kidneys to dilute the urine. 
           Serum osmolality Serum osmolality readily differentiates between true hyponatremia and pseudohyponatremia. The latter may be secondary to hyperlipidemia or hyperproteinemia, or may be hypertonic hyponatremia associated with elevated glucose, mannitol, glycine (posturologic or postgynecologic procedure), sucrose, or maltose (contained in IgG formulations). 
           Urinary sodium concentration Urinary sodium concentration helps differentiate between hyponatremia secondary to hypovolemia and syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH). With SIADH (and salt-wasting syndrome), the urine sodium is greater than 20-40 mEq/L. With hypovolemia, the urine sodium typically measures less than 25 mEq/L. However, if sodium intake in a patient with SIADH (or salt-wasting) happens to be low, then urine sodium may fall below 25 mEq/L. See  Workup 
         Management Hypotonic hyponatremia accounts for most clinical cases of hyponatremia and can be treated with fluids. Acute hyponatremia (duration < 48 hours) can be safely corrected more quickly than chronic hyponatremia. The treatment of hypertonic and pseudohyponatremia is directed at the underlying disorder in the absence of symptoms. 
           Intravenous fluids and water restriction Administer isotonic saline to patients who are hypovolemic to replace the contracted intravascular volume. Patients with hypovolemia secondary to diuretics may also need potassium repletion, which, like sodium, is osmotically active. Treat patients who are hypervolemic with salt and fluid restriction, plus loop diuretics, and correction of the underlying condition. The use of a V2 receptor antagonist may be considered. For euvolemic, asymptomatic hyponatremic patients, free water restriction (< 1 L/day) is generally the treatment of choice. There is no role for hypertonic saline in these patients. When treating patients with overtly symptomatic hyponatremia (eg, seizures, severe neurologic deficits), hypertonic (3%) saline should be used. 
           Pharmacologic treatment Conivaptan, a V1A and V2 vasopressin receptor antagonist, is available only for intravenous use and is approved for use in the hospital setting for euvolemic and hypervolemic hyponatremia. It is contraindicated in hypovolemic patients. It induces both a water and sodium diuresis with improvement in plasma sodium levels. See  Treatment Medication 
       Background 
         Hyponatremia is an important and common electrolyte abnormality that can be seen in isolation or, as most often is the case, as a complication of other medical illnesses. Sodium is the dominant extracellular cation and cannot freely cross the cell membrane. Its homeostasis is vital to the normal physiological function of cells. The normal serum sodium level is 135-145 mEq/L. Hyponatremia is defined as a serum level of less than 135 mEq/L and is considered severe when the serum level is below 125 mEq/L. Joint European guidelines classify hyponatremia in adults as follows [ 
           Mild - Serum sodium concentration 130-134 mmol/L Moderate - Serum sodium concentration 125-129 mmol/L Profound - Serum sodium concentration <125 mmol/L This article reviews the epidemiology, pathophysiology, differential diagnosis, evaluation, and treatment of this disorder. [ 
       Pathophysiology 
         Hypoosmolality (serum osmolality < 280 mOsm/kg) always indicates excess total body water relative to body solutes or excess water relative to solute in the extracellular fluid (ECF), as water moves freely between the intracellular and the extracellular compartments. This imbalance can be due to solute depletion, solute dilution, or a combination of both. Under normal conditions, renal handling of water is sufficient to excrete as much as 15-20 L of free water per day. Further, the body's response to a decreased osmolality is decreased thirst. Thus, hyponatremia can occur only when some condition impairs normal free water excretion. [ The recommendations for treatment of hyponatremia rely on the current understanding of CNS adaptation to an altered serum osmolality. In the setting of an acute drop in the serum osmolality, neuronal cell swelling occurs due to the water shift from the extracellular space to the intracellular space (ie, Starling forces). Swelling of the brain cells elicits the following two osmoregulatory responses: 
           
             It inhibits both arginine vasopressin secretion from neurons in the hypothalamus and hypothalamic thirst center. This leads to excess water elimination as dilute urine. 
             There is an immediate cellular adaptation with loss of electrolytes, and over the next few days, there is a more gradual loss of organic intracellular osmolytes. [ Therefore, correction of hyponatremia must take into account the chronicity of the condition. Acute hyponatremia (duration < 48 h) can be safely corrected more quickly than chronic hyponatremia. Correction of serum sodium that is too rapid can precipitate severe neurologic complications. Most individuals who present for diagnosis, versus individuals who develop it while in an inpatient setting, have had hyponatremia for some time, so the condition is chronic, and correction should proceed accordingly. 
       Frequency 
         United States The incidence of hyponatremia depends largely on the patient population and the criteria used to establish the diagnosis. Among hospitalized patients, 15-20% have a serum sodium level of <135 mEq/L, while only 1-4% have a serum sodium level of less than 130 mEq/L. The prevalence of hyponatremia is lower in the ambulatory setting. 
       Mortality/Morbidity 
         Severe hyponatremia (< 125 mEq/L) has a high mortality rate. In instances when the serum sodium level is less than 105 mEq/L, the mortality is over 50%, especially in alcoholics. [ [ MELD Score calculator [ 
         Race Hyponatremia affects all races. 
         Sex No sexual predilection exists for hyponatremia. However, symptoms are more likely to occur in young women than in men. 
         Age Hyponatremia is more common in elderly persons, because they have an increased incidence of comorbid conditions (eg, cardiac, hepatic, or renal failure) that can be complicated by it. 
     Clinical Presentation 
       History 
         Patients may present to medical attention with symptoms related to low serum sodium concentrations. However, many patients present due to manifestations of other medical comorbidities, with hyponatremia being recognized only secondarily. For many people, therefore, the recognition is entirely incidental. Patients may develop clinical symptoms due to the cause of hyponatremia or the hyponatremia itself. Many medical illnesses, such as congestive heart failure, liver failure, renal failure, or pneumonia, may be associated with hyponatremia. These patients frequently present because of primary disease symptomatology (eg, dyspnea, jaundice, uremia, and cough). [ Symptoms range from nausea and malaise, with mild reduction in the serum sodium, to lethargy, decreased level of consciousness, headache, and (if severe) seizures and coma. Overt neurologic symptoms most often are due to very low serum sodium levels (usually <115 mEq/L), resulting in intracerebral osmotic fluid shifts and brain edema. This neurologic symptom complex can lead to tentorial herniation with subsequent brain stem compression and respiratory arrest, resulting in death in the most severe cases. The severity of neurologic symptoms correlates well with the rate and degree of the drop in serum sodium. A gradual drop in serum sodium, even to very low levels, may be tolerated well if it occurs over several days or weeks, because of neuronal adaptation. The presence of an underlying neurologic disease, like a seizure disorder, or nonneurologic metabolic abnormalities, like hypoxia, hypercapnia, or acidosis, also affects the severity of neurologic symptoms. In interviewing the patient, obtaining a detailed medication history, including information on over-the-counter (OTC) drugs the patient has been using, is important because many medications may precipitate hyponatremia (eg, antipsychotic medications, diuretics). A dietary history with reference to salt, protein, and water intake is useful as well. For patients who are hospitalized, reviewing the records of parenteral fluids administered is crucial. 
       Physical 
         Examination should include orthostatic vital signs and an accurate assessment of volume status. This determination (ie, hypervolemic, euvolemic, hypovolemic) often guides treatment decisions. A full assessment for medical comorbidities is also essential, with particular attention paid to cardiopulmonary and neurologic components of the examination. 
       Causes 
         Although the differential diagnosis is quite broad, hyponatremia can be divided into the following clinically useful groupings: 
         Hypertonic hyponatremia Patients with hypertonic hyponatremia have normal total body sodium and a dilutional drop in the measured serum sodium due to the presence of osmotically active molecules in the serum, which causes a water shift from the intracellular compartment to the extracellular compartment. Glucose produces a drop in the serum sodium level of 1.6 mEq/L for each 100 mg/dL of serum glucose greater than 100 mg/dL. This relationship is nonlinear, with greater reduction in plasma sodium concentrations with glucose concentrations over 400 mg/dL, making 2.4 mEq/L for each 100 mg/dL increase in glucose over 100 mg/dL a more accurate correction factor when the glucose is greater than 400 mg/dL. [ Other examples of osmotically active molecules include mannitol (often used to treat brain edema) or maltose (used with intravenous immunoglobulin administration). 
         Normotonic hyponatremia Severe hyperlipidemia and paraproteinemia can lead to low measured serum sodium concentrations with normal serum osmolality. Normally, the plasma water comprises 92-94% of plasma volume. The plasma water fraction falls with an increase in fats and proteins. The measured sodium concentration in the total plasma volume is respectively reduced, although the plasma water sodium concentration and plasma osmolality are unchanged. This artifactual low sodium (so-called pseudohyponatremia) is secondary to measurement by flame photometry. It can be avoided by direct ion-selective electrode measurement. Hyponatremia post-transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) or hysteroscopy is caused by absorption of irrigants, glycine, sorbitol, or mannitol, contained in nonconductive flushing solutions used. The degree of hyponatremia is related to the quantity and rate of fluid absorbed. The plasma osmolality is also variable and changes over time. The presence of a relatively large osmolal gap due to excess organic solute is diagnostic in the appropriate clinical setting. Symptomatic patients are treated depending on plasma osmolality and volume status with hypertonic saline in hypoosmolar state or loop diuretic in volume-overloaded patients with normal renal function. Hemodialysis, which will correct the hyponatremia and remove glycine and its toxic metabolites, can be used in patients with end-stage renal disease. Use of isotonic saline as an irrigant instead of glycine with the new bipolar resectoscope for TURP in high-risk patients (with large prostates that require lengthy resection) could avoid this complication, making this disorder a diagnosis of the past. [ 
         Hypotonic hyponatremia Hypotonic hyponatremia always reflects the inability of the kidneys to handle the excretion of free water to match intake. It can be divided pathophysiologically into the following categories, according to the effective intravascular volume: hypovolemic, hypervolemic, and euvolemic. These clinically relevant groupings aid in determination of likely underlying etiology and guide treatment. 
           Hypovolemic hypotonic hyponatremia This usually indicates concomitant solute depletion, with patients presenting with orthostatic symptoms. The pathophysiology underlying hypovolemic hypotonic hyponatremia is complex and involves the interplay of carotid baroreceptors, the sympathetic nervous system, the renin-angiotensin system, antidiuretic hormone (ADH) secretion (vasopressin), and renal tubular function. In the setting of decreased intravascular volume (eg, severe hemorrhage or severe volume depletion secondary to GI or renal loss, or diuretic use) owing to a decreased stretch on the baroreceptors in the great veins, aortic arch, and carotid bodies, an increased sympathetic tone to maintain systemic blood pressure generally occurs. This increased sympathetic tone, along with decreased renal perfusion secondary to intravascular volume depletion, results in increased renin and angiotensin excretion. This, in turn, results in increased sodium absorption in the proximal tubules of the kidney and consequent decreased delivery of solutes to distal diluting segments, causing an impairment of renal free water excretion. There also is a concomitant increase in serum ADH production that further impairs free water excretion. Because angiotensin is also a very potent stimulant of thirst, free water intake is increased, and, at the same time, water excretion is limited. Together, these changes lead to hyponatremia. Cerebral salt wasting (CSW) is seen with intracranial disorders, such as subarachnoid hemorrhage, carcinomatous or infectious meningitis, and metastatic carcinoma, but especially after neurologic procedures. Disruption of sympathetic neural input into the kidney, which normally promotes salt and water reabsorption in the proximal nephron segment through various indirect and direct mechanisms, might cause renal salt wasting, resulting in reduced plasma volume. Plasma renin and aldosterone levels fail to rise appropriately in patients with CSW despite a reduced plasma volume because of disruption of the sympathetic nervous system. In addition, the release of 1 or more natriuretic factors could also play a role in the renal salt wasting seen in CSW. Volume depletion leads to an elevation of plasma vasopressin levels and impaired free water excretion. Distinguishing between CSW and syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion (SIADH) can be challenging, because there is considerable overlap in the clinical presentation. Vigorous salt replacement is required in patients with CSW, whereas fluid restriction is the treatment of choice in patients with SIADH. Infusion of isotonic saline to correct the volume depletion is usually effective in reversing the hyponatremia in cerebral salt wasting, since euvolemia will suppress the release of ADH. The disorder is usually transient, with resolution occurring within 3-4 weeks of disease onset. [ Salt-wasting nephropathy causing hypovolemic hyponatremia may rarely develop in a range of renal disorders (eg, interstitial nephropathy, medullary cystic disease, polycystic kidney disease, partial urinary obstruction) with low salt intake. Diuretics may induce hypovolemic hyponatremia. Note that thiazide diuretics, in contrast to loop diuretics, impair the diluting mechanism without limiting the concentrating mechanism, thereby impairing the ability to excrete a free water load. Thus, thiazides are more prone to causing hyponatremia than are loop diuretics. This is particularly so in elderly persons, who already have impaired diluting ability. 
           Hypervolemic hypotonic hyponatremia This is characterized by clinically detectable edema or ascites that signifies an increase in total body water and sodium. Paradoxically, however, a decrease in the effective circulating volume, critical for tissue perfusion, stimulates the same pathophysiologic mechanism of impaired water excretion by the kidney that is observed in hypovolemic hypotonic hyponatremia. Commonly encountered examples include liver cirrhosis, congestive heart failure, nephrotic syndrome, and severe hypoproteinemia (albumin level <1.5-2 g/dL). 
           Normovolemic (euvolemic) hypotonic hyponatremia This is a very common cause of hyponatremia in patients who are hospitalized. It is associated with nonosmotic and nonvolume related vasopressin (ADH) secretion (ie, SIADH) secondary to a variety of clinical conditions, including CNS disturbances, major surgery, trauma, pulmonary tumors, infection, stress, and certain medications. Common medications associated with SIADH are as follows: chlorpropamide (potentiating renal action of ADH), carbamazepine (possesses antidiuretic property), cyclophosphamide (marked water retention secondary to SIADH and potentially fatal hyponatremia may ensue in selected cases; use of isotonic saline rather than free water to maintain a high urine output to prevent hemorrhagic cystitis can minimize the risk), vincristine, vinblastine, amitriptyline, haloperidol, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (particularly in elderly patients), and monoamine oxidase (MAO) antidepressants. In these circumstances, the ability of the kidney to dilute urine in the setting of serum hypotonicity is reduced. Hyponatremia is a relatively common adverse effect of desmopressin, a vasopressin analogue that acts as a pure V2 agonist. Its common use in the treatment of central diabetes insipidus, von Willebrand disease, and nocturia in adults and of enuresis in children requires regular monitoring of serum sodium levels. The diagnostic criteria for SIADH are as follows: 
           
             Normal hepatic, renal, and cardiac function - clinical euvolemia (absence of intravascular volume depletion) 
             Normal thyroid and adrenal function 
             Hypotonic hyponatremia 
             Urine osmolality greater than 100 mOsm/kg, generally greater than 400-500 mOsm/kg with normal renal function Urinary sodium concentrations are also typically greater than 20 mEq/L on a normal salt diet as sodium excretion will reflect dietary sodium intake. Serum uric acid levels are generally reduced; this is due to reduced tubular uric acid reabsorption, which parallels the decrease in proximal tubular sodium reabsorption associated with central volume expansion. These findings are also found in a renal salt wasting process. This similarity makes the differentiation between salt wasting and SIADH difficult except that in renal wasting, one would expect to find a hypovolemic state. Reset osmostat is another important cause of normovolemic hypotonic hyponatremia. This may occur in elderly patients and during pregnancy. These patients regulate their serum osmolality around a reduced set point; however, in contrast to patients with SIADH (who also have a downward resetting of the osmotic threshold for thirst), [ Severe hypothyroidism (unknown mechanism, possibly secondary to low cardiac output and glomerular filtration rate) and adrenal insufficiency are also associated with nonosmotic vasopressin release and impaired sodium reabsorption, leading to hypotonic hyponatremia. Hyponatremia associated with cortisol deficiency, such as primary or secondary hypoadrenalism, commonly presents subtly and may go undiagnosed. A random cortisol level check, especially in acute illness, can be misleading if the level is normal (when it should be high). Testing for adrenal insufficiency and hypothyroidism should be part of the hyponatremic workup, as the disorders respond promptly to hormone replacement. Depending on the etiology, mineralocorticoid will also need replacement. Hospitalized patients who are infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) have a high incidence of hyponatremia. In these individuals, hyponatremia is usually due to at least one of the following three disorders associated with an increased ADH level: 
           
             Increased release of ADH due to malignancy, to occult or symptomatic infection of the central nervous system, or to pneumonia resulting from infection with  Pneumocystis carinii 
             Effective volume depletion secondary to fluid loss from the gastrointestinal tract, due primarily to infectious diarrhea. 
             Adrenal insufficiency often due to an adrenalitis, an abnormality that may be infectious in origin, perhaps being induced by cytomegalovirus,  Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare 
         Other causes There are other causes that do not fit neatly in any of the above categories and may or may not be associated with elevated levels of ADH or simply overwhelm the capacity of the kidneys to properly excrete excess water. The most common precipitant of hyponatremia in patients after surgery [ Severe malnutrition seen in weight-conscious women (low protein, high water intake diet) is a special condition in which a markedly decreased intake of solutes occurs, which limits the ability of the kidney to handle the free water. Because a mandatory solute loss of 50-100 mOsm/kg of urine exists, free water intake in excess of solute needs can produce hyponatremia. [ Compulsive intake of large amounts of free water exceeding the diluting capacity of the kidneys (>20 L/d), even with a normal solute intake of 600-900 mOsm/d, may also result in hyponatremia, but in contrast to SIADH, the urine is maximally dilute. In addition to a central defect in thirst regulation, which plays an important role in the pathogenesis of primary polydipsia, different abnormalities in ADH regulation have been identified in psychotic patients, all impairing free water excretion. Transient stimulation of ADH release during acute psychotic episodes, an increase in the net renal response to ADH, downward resetting of the osmostat, and antipsychotic medication may contribute. Limiting water intake will rapidly raise the plasma sodium concentration as the excess water is readily excreted in dilute urine [ Acute hyponatremia is associated with ultra-endurance athletes and marathon runners. With women making up a higher percentage, the strongest single predictor is weight gain during the race correlating with excessive fluid intake. Longer racing time and body mass index extremes are also associated with hyponatremia, whereas the composition of fluids consumed (plain water rather than sports drinks containing electrolytes) is not. Oxidization of glycogen and triglyceride during a race is associated with the production of "bound" water, which then becomes an endogenous, electrolyte-free water infusion contributing to hyponatremia induced by water ingestion in excess of water losses. It should be noted, some collapsed runners are normonatremic or even hypernatremic, [ [ [ Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) use may increase the risk of development of hyponatremia by strenuous exercise by inhibiting prostaglandin formation. Prostaglandins have a natriuretic effect. Prostaglandin depletion increases NaCl reabsorption in the thick ascending limb of Henle (ultimately increasing medullary tonicity) and ADH action in the collecting duct, leading to impaired free water excretion. [ Symptomatic and potentially fatal hyponatremia can develop with rapid onset after ingestion of the designer drug ecstasy (methylenedioxymethamphetamine, or MDMA), an amphetamine. A marked increase in water intake via direct thirst stimulation, as well as inappropriate secretion of ADH, contributes to the hyponatremia seen with even small amount of drug intake. Nephrogenic syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis (or NSIAD) is an SIADH-like clinical and laboratory picture seen in male infants who present with neurologic symptoms secondary to hyponatremia but who have undetectable plasma arginine vasopressin (AVP) levels. This hereditary disorder is secondary to mutations in the V2 vasopressin receptor, resulting in constitutive activation of the receptor with elevated cAMP production in the collecting duct principle cells. Treatment of NSIAD poses a challenge. Water restriction improves serum sodium levels and osmolality in infants, but it limits calorie intake in these formula-fed infants. The use of demeclocycline or lithium is potentially limited because of adverse effects. The current therapy of choice is fluid restriction and the use of oral urea to induce an osmotic diuresis. [ Hyponatremic hypertensive syndrome, a rare condition, consists of severe hypertension associated with renal artery stenosis, hyponatremia, hypokalemia, severe thirst, and renal dysfunction characterized by natriuresis, hypercalciuria, renal glycosuria, and proteinuria. Angiotensin-mediated thirst coupled with nonosmotic release of vasopressin provoked by angiotensin II and/or hypertensive encephalopathy are likely mechanisms for this syndrome. Sodium depletion due to pressure natriuresis and potassium depletion due to hyperaldosteronism with high plasma renin activity are also likely to play a role in the pathogenesis of hyponatremia. The abnormalities resolve with correction of the renal artery stenosis. [ Using a retrospective case note analysis, an Irish study examined the incidence of hyponatremia in a variety of neurologic conditions. [ P P P P The investigators also determined that the median hospital stay for patients with hyponatremia was 19 days, compared with a median stay of 12 days for the study's other patients. 
     Differential Diagnoses 
       Diagnostic Considerations Other problems to consider in the differential diagnosis are as follows: 
         
           Hyperlipidemia 
           Paraproteinemia 
           Pseudohyponatremia 
       
         Adrenal Crisis 
         Alcoholism 
         Cardiogenic Pulmonary Edema 
         Cirrhosis 
         Hypothyroidism 
     Workup 
       Laboratory Studies 
         There are three essential laboratory tests in the evaluation of patients with hyponatremia that, together with the history and the physical examination, help to establish the primary underlying etiologic mechanism. (In general, the etiology of the hyponatremia directs its management.) These tests are as follows 
           
             Urine osmolality 
             Serum osmolality 
             Urinary sodium concentration Urine osmolality helps to differentiate between conditions associated with impaired free water excretion and primary polydipsia, in which water excretion should be normal (provided intact kidney function). With primary polydipsia, as with malnutrition (severe decreased solids intake) and a reset osmostat, the urine osmolality is maximally dilute, generally less than 100 mOsm/kg. A urine osmolality greater than 100 mOsm/kg indicates impaired ability of the kidneys to dilute the urine. This usually is secondary to elevated vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone; ADH) levels, appropriate or inappropriate. Serum osmolality readily differentiates between true hyponatremia and pseudohyponatremia secondary to hyperlipidemia, hyperproteinemia, or hypertonic hyponatremia. Sources of hypertonic hyponatremia include elevations of the following: 
           
             Glucose 
             Mannitol 
             Glycine (after urologic or gynecologic procedures) 
             Sucrose 
             Maltose (contained in IgG formulations) Urinary sodium concentration helps to differentiate between hyponatremia secondary to hypovolemia and the  syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion 
         Ancillary tests Serum uric acid levels can be important supportive information (they are typically reduced in SIADH and also reduced in salt wasting). After correction of hyponatremia, the hypouricemia corrects in SIADH but remains with a salt-wasting process. Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) and serum cortisol levels should be measured if hypothyroidism or hypoadrenalism is suspected. Serum albumin, triglycerides, and a serum protein electrophoresis also may be indicated for particular patients. 
       Imaging Studies 
         Head computed tomography (CT) scanning and chest radiography can be used to assess for an underlying etiology in select patients with suspected SIADH or cerebral salt wasting. 
     Treatment & Management 
       Approach Considerations 
         The recommendations for treatment of hyponatremia rely on the current understanding of the central nervous system (CNS) adaptation to an alteration in serum osmolality. In the setting of an acute fall in the serum osmolality, neuronal cell swelling occurs due to the water shift from the extracellular space to the intracellular space (ie, Starling forces). Therefore, correction of hyponatremia should take into account the limited capacity of this adaptation mechanism to respond to acute alteration in the serum tonicity, because the degree of brain edema and consequent neurologic symptoms depend as much on the rate and duration of hypotonicity as they do on its magnitude. A panel of United States experts on hyponatremia issued guidelines on the diagnosis, evaluation, and treatment of hyponatremia in 2007; the guidelines were updated in 2013. [ 
           Severe symptoms: 100 mL of 3% NaCl infused intravenously over 10 minutes × 3 as needed Mild to moderate symptoms, in patients at low risk for herniation: 3% NaCl infused at 0.5–2 mL/kg/h To avoid osmotic demyelination syndrome (ODS) in patients with chronic hyponatremia (known duration >48 hours), the recommendations include the following [ 
           Minimum correction of serum sodium by 4-8 mmol/L per day, with a lower goal of 4-6 mmol/L per day if the risk of ODS is high For patients at high risk of ODS: maximum correction of 8 mmol/L in any 24-hour period  For patients at normal risk of ODS: maximum correction of 10-12 mmol/L in any 24-hour period; 18 mmol/L in any 48-hour period For patients with inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH), fluid restriction (with a goal of 500 mL/d below the 24-hour urine volume) is generally first-line therapy, but pharmacologic treatment should be strongly considered if the patient's urinary parameters indicate low renal electrolyte-free water excretion or if the serum sodium concentration does not correct after 24-48 hours of fluid restriction. Pharmacologic options include demeclocycline (off label use), urea, and vasopressin receptor antagonists (vaptans). Vaptans should not be used in hypovolemic hyponatremia, or in conjunction with other treatments for hyponatremia. [ The European Society of Intensive Care Medicine, the European Society of Endocrinology, and the European Renal Association–European Dialysis and Transplant Association have released guidelines on the diagnosis, classification, and treatment of true hypotonic hyponatremia. Treatment recommendations include the following [ 
           For serious symptomatic hyponatremia, the first line of treatment is prompt intravenous infusion of hypertonic saline, with a target increase of 6 mmol/L over 24 hours (not exceeding 12 mmol/L) and an additional 8 mmol/L during every 24 hours thereafter until the patient’s serum sodium concentration reaches 130 mmol/L First-line treatment for patients with SIADH and moderate or profound hyponatremia should be fluid restriction; second-line treatments include increasing solute intake with 0.25–0.50 g/kg per day of urea or combined treatment with low-dose loop diuretics and oral sodium chloride For patients with reduced circulating volume, extracellular volume should be restored with an intravenous infusion of 0.9% saline or a balanced crystalloid solution at 0.5 to 1.0 mL/kg per hour Lithium, demeclocycline, and vaptans are not recommended for patients with moderate or profound hyponatremia Consultation with either a nephrologist or a critical care specialist is often of considerable value in managing patients with symptomatic or refractory hyponatremia. 
       Medical Care 
         Intravenous fluids and water restriction When faced with a patient with hyponatremia, the first decision is what type of fluid, if any, should be given. The treatment of hypertonic and pseudohyponatremia is directed at the underlying disorder in the absence of symptoms. Hypotonic hyponatremia accounts for most clinical cases of hyponatremia. The first step in the approach and evaluation of hypotonic hyponatremia is to determine whether emergency therapy is warranted. The following three factors guide treatment: 
           
             Patient's volume status 
             Duration and magnitude of the hyponatremia 
             Degree and severity of clinical symptoms For the asymptomatic patient, the following treatments may be of use: 
           
             Hypovolemic hyponatremia: Administer isotonic saline to patients who are hypovolemic to replace the contracted intravascular volume (thereby treating the cause of vasopressin release). Patients with hypovolemia secondary to diuretics may also need potassium repletion, which, like sodium, is osmotically active. Correction of volume repletion turns off the stimulus to ADH secretion, so a large water diuresis may ensue, leading to a more rapid correction of hyponatremia than desired. If so, hypotonic fluid such as D5/½ normal saline may need to be administered (see below under normovolemic hyponatremia for guidelines). 
             Hypervolemic hyponatremia: Treat patients who are hypervolemic with salt and fluid restriction, plus loop diuretics, and correction of the underlying condition. The use of a V2 receptor antagonist may be considered (see below). For normovolemic (euvolemic), asymptomatic hyponatremic patients, free water restriction (<1 L/d) is generally the treatment of choice. There is no role for hypertonic saline in these patients. Base the volume of restriction on the patient's renal diluting capacity. For instance, fluid restriction to 1 L/d, which is enough to raise the serum sodium in some patients, may exceed the renal free water excretion capacity in others, necessitating more severe restriction. This approach is recommended as initial treatment for patients with asymptomatic SIADH. However, many patients will not adhere to fluid restriction. Further, the definition of asymptomatic is changing due to the recognition that subtle but significant deficits, such as in gait, may be present. Therefore, pharmacologic treatment may be considered (see below). When treating patients with overtly symptomatic hyponatremia (eg, seizures, severe neurological deficits), hypertonic (3%) saline should be used. There is no place in the initial treatment for aquaretics (see below). Note that normal saline can exacerbate hyponatremia in patients with SIADH, who may excrete the sodium and retain the water. A liter of normal saline contains 154 mEq sodium chloride (NaCl) and 3% saline has 513 mEq NaCl. Management decisions should also factor in ongoing renal free water and solute losses. Alternately, the combination of intravenous normal saline and diuresis with a loop diuretic (eg, furosemide) also elevates the serum sodium concentration. This latter approach is often useful for patients with high urine osmolality, because the loop diuretic acts to reduce urine osmolality. Concomitant use of loop diuretics increases free water excretion and decreases the risk of fluid overload. The following equation helps to estimate an expected change in serum sodium (Na) with respect to characteristics of infusates used [ During therapy, close monitoring of serum electrolytes (ie, every 2-4 h) to avoid overcorrection is essential. Acute hyponatremia (duration < 48 h) can be safely corrected more quickly than chronic hyponatremia. A severely symptomatic patient with acute hyponatremia is in danger from brain edema. In contrast, a symptomatic patient with chronic hyponatremia is more at risk from rapid correction of hyponatremia. Overly rapid correction of serum sodium can precipitate severe neurologic complications, such as central pontine myelinosis, which can produce spastic quadriparesis, swallowing dysfunction, pseudobulbar palsy, and mutism. A symptomatic patient with unknown duration of hyponatremia is the most challenging, warranting a prompt but controlled and limited correction of hyponatremia, until symptoms resolve. However,  fear of osmotic demyelination should not deter prompt and definitive treatment. With patients who are acutely symptomatic (duration <48 h, such as after surgery), the treatment goal is to increase the serum sodium level by approximately 1-2 mEq/L/h for 3-4 hours, until the neurologic symptoms subside or until plasma sodium concentration is over 120 mEq/L. [ [ In chronic, severe symptomatic hyponatremia, the rate of correction should not exceed 0.5-1 mEq/L/h, with a total increase not to exceed 8-12 mEq/L/d and no more than 18 mEq/L in the first 48 h. The sodium concentration must be corrected to a safe range (usually to no greater than 120 mEq/L) rather than to a normal value. As noted above, spontaneous diuresis secondary to ADH suppression with intravascular volume repletion could lead to unintended overcorrection. 
         Pharmacologic treatment Pharmacologic agents can be used in some cases of more refractory SIADH, allowing more liberal fluid intake. Demeclocycline has been the drug of choice to increase the diluting capacity of the kidneys, by achieving vasopressin antagonism and a functional diabetes insipidus. This treatment requires 3-4 days for maximal effect. Demeclocycline is contraindicated in cirrhotic patients. Other agents, such as lithium, have been used with variable success. Lithium is also associated with several untoward effects, including thyroid dysfunction, interstitial kidney disease, and, in overdosage, CNS dysfunction, which make its use problematic. The treatment of psychogenic polydipsia can be difficult and may require psychiatric, pharmacologic, and fluid intervention. 
           Aquaretics A new class of drugs, AVP receptor antagonists, designed specifically to promote aquaresis (ie, electrolyte-sparing excretion of free water), has been evaluated in clinical trials for the treatment of hyponatremia. [ In addition, the effects in patients with renal and hepatic impairment have not been well studied and caution is advised with use in this population. There are several drug interactions that need close monitoring and the use of conivaptan with CYP3A4 inhibitors is contraindicated. Tolvaptan, a selective V2 receptor antagonist, can be taken orally and has been approved for use in the treatment of euvolemic and hypervolemic hyponatremia, including cases associated with cirrhosis and heart failure. Tolvaptan treatment must be initiated in the hospital to avoid the possibility of too rapid correction (although there have not been reported cases). It shows great promise but because of the requirement for hospitalization for initiation or reintroduction and the expense of the drug, its use at this time is limited. It also interacts with CYP3A inhibitors and use with such drugs is contraindicated. In April 2013, the FDA limited use of tolvaptan to no more than 30 days and indicated that it should not be used in patients with underlying liver disease. This decision was based on reports of liver injury, including those potentially leading to liver transplant or death. [ The use of these vaptans is limited and exact benefits have yet to be determined. There are reports that even mild hyponatremia can cause gait instability and possibly increase the risk of falls and hip fractures. In this setting, vaptans may be beneficial to improve hyponatremia and gait. 
       Diet 
         Free water restriction often is appropriate for patients with normovolemic hypotonic hyponatremia. Individuals who are undernourished need to maintain an appropriate solute intake. In fact, in patients with SIADH, a high protein intake increases the solute load for excretion, thereby removing more free water. Although unpalatable, oral urea has been used to achieve the same effect. Patients with hyperglycemia or hyperlipidemia should receive appropriate nutritional counseling. 
     Medication 
       Medication Summary The primary treatments used in the management of hyponatremic patients rely on the use of intravenous sodium-containing fluids (normal saline or hypertonic saline) and fluid restriction. Less commonly, loop diuretics (eg, furosemide) or demeclocycline are used. A new class of drugs, AVP receptor antagonists (eg, conivaptan), is now available. [ 
       Diuretics 
         Class Summary Loop diuretics occasionally are used in patients with hyponatremia to increase renal free water excretion. 
         Furosemide (Lasix) High-ceiling diuretic with a prompt onset of action that acts upon ascending limb of loop of Henle to inhibit sodium/potassium/chloride cotransport system, thereby increasing solute delivery to distal renal tubules, which acts to increase free water excretion. This can lead to increased aldosterone production, resulting in increased sodium absorption. Absorbed readily from the GI tract and also available in parenteral preparations. Diuresis begins 30-60 min with oral vs 5 min with IV administration. Potassium excretion also is increased. Elderly patients may have greater sensitivity to effects of furosemide.  
       Antibiotics 
         Class Summary Certain antibiotics may affect renal ADH action. 
         Demeclocycline (Declomycin) Can cause insensitivity of distal renal tubules to the action of ADH and produce a nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. Effects are seen within 5 days and are reversed within 2-6 days following cessation of therapy.  
       Arginine Vasopressin Antagonists 
         Class Summary Treats hyponatremia through V2 antagonism of AVP in the renal collecting ducts. This effect results in aquaresis (excretion of free water). [ 
         Conivaptan (Vaprisol) Arginine vasopressin antagonist (V1A, V2) indicated for euvolemic (dilutional) and hypervolemic hyponatremia. Increases urine output of mostly free water, with little electrolyte loss. Over 80% of conivaptan excreted in feces and the rest in urine.  
         Tolvaptan (Samsca) Selective vasopressin V2-receptor antagonist. Indicated for hypervolemic and euvolemic hyponatremia (ie, serum sodium level < 125 mEq/L) or less-marked hyponatremia that is symptomatic and has resisted correction with fluid restriction. Used for hyponatremia associated with congestive heart failure, liver cirrhosis, and syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion. Initiate or reinitiate in hospital environment only. Duration of use is limited to 30 days to minimize risk of liver injury.  
     Follow-up 
       Further Inpatient Care 
         Patients with hyponatremia from any cause require close attention to their electrolyte and fluid status. Patients with symptomatic hyponatremia who are being actively treated often require several daily measurements of serum sodium to avoid a rate of correction that is too rapid. After acute treatment, follow-up generally is dictated by the underlying etiology of the hyponatremia. 
       Complications 
         Clinical manifestations include clouding of consciousness, confusion, stupor, or coma. Seizures commonly occur with rapid reductions in serum sodium or with serum sodium concentrations of less than 115-120 mEq/L. For unknown reasons, premenopausal women seem to have a less efficient osmotic adaptation. This increases their susceptibility to severe hyponatremia and rapid progression from minimal symptoms (eg, headache, nausea) to respiratory arrest. Cerebral edema and herniation have been found at autopsy. [ Correction of hyponatremia that is too rapid may cause permanent neurologic impairment. Central pontine myelinolysis (CPM) and extrapontine myelinolysis (EPM), complications of excessive correction of chronic hyponatremia, are now diagnosed by diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Of note is that conventional CT and MRI scan findings typically lag behind the clinical manifestations of myelinosis by 2-4 weeks. [ The clinical course of these patients features initial encephalopathy secondary to hyponatremia, then improvement as the plasma Na concentration increases, and finally deterioration several days later. The disorder can resolve completely or result in permanent disability or death. This typical clinical course has been called the osmotic demyelination syndrome (ODS). The clinical neurologic picture may be confusing, as it may include a variety of findings from psychiatric, behavioral, and movement disorders, such as dysphagia and flaccid or spastic quadriparesis, depending on the involvement of extrapontine or central pontine myelinolysis. Disruption of the blood-brain barrier is presumed to play an important role in the pathogenesis of osmotic demyelination. An increased susceptibility to osmotic demyelination is also observed in cirrhotic patients. In this setting, myoinositol, the most abundant organic osmolyte, is depleted because of glutamine- and hyponatremia-induced brain cell swelling. CPM is a common and often fatal complication of orthotopic liver transplantation, affecting up to 10% of patients who were hyponatremic prior to transplant. [ 
       Prognosis 
         The prognosis for patients with hyponatremia is predicated upon the underlying etiology. A study by Doshi et al found that hyponatremia among patients with cancer is associated with extended hospital stays and higher mortality rates; however, whether long-term correction of hyponatremia would improve these outcomes is unclear. [ A meta-analysis of 15 studies encompassing 13,816 patients found that any improvement in hyponatremia was associated with a reduced risk of overall mortality (odds ratio [OR]=0.57). With the eight studies that reported a threshold for serum sodium improvement to >130 mmol/L, the association was even stronger (OR=0.51). The reduction in mortality risk persisted at 12-month follow-up (OR=0.55). Reduced mortality was more evident in older patients and in patients with lower serum sodium levels at enrollment. [     
       Patient Education 
         Patients to be treated with a fluid restriction often require education regarding the free water content of foods and an explanation of the need to limit the intake of liquids to a predetermined level. 
     start media 
       
         Central pontine myelinolysis, MRI FLAIR  Central pontine myelinolysis, MRI FLAIR  
       
         Extrapontine myelinolysis T2  Extrapontine myelinolysis T2  
     
       Author 
         Eric E Simon, MD Professor of Medicine, Chief, Section of Nephrology and Hypertension, Tulane University School of Medicine; Director, Nephrology Training, Medical Director, Dialysis Clinic, Inc, Canal Street Eric E Simon, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American Federation for Medical Research American Heart Association American Physiological Society American Society of Nephrology Central Society for Clinical and Translational Research International Society of Nephrology National Kidney Foundation Phi Beta Kappa American Society for Cell Biology Southern Society for Clinical Investigation Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Coauthor(s) 
         Seyed Mehrdad Hamrahian, MD Assistant Professor of Medicine, Jefferson Medical College of Thomas Jefferson University Seyed Mehrdad Hamrahian, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American Society of Nephrology International Society of Nephrology National Kidney Foundation Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
         Federico J Teran, MD Instructor of Clinical Medicine, Section of Nephrology and Hypertension, Tulane University School of Medicine Federico J Teran, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American College of Physicians American Medical Association American Society of Nephrology Louisiana State Medical Society National Kidney Foundation Renal Physicians Association Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Pharmacy Editor 
         Francisco Talavera, PharmD, PhD Adjunct Assistant Professor, University of Nebraska Medical Center College of Pharmacy; Editor-in-Chief, Medscape Drug Reference Disclosure: Received salary from Medscape for employment. for: Medscape. 
       Managing Editor 
         Eleanor Lederer, MD Professor of Medicine, Chief, Nephrology Division, Director, Nephrology Training Program, Director, Metabolic Stone Clinic, Kidney Disease Program, University of Louisville School of Medicine; Consulting Staff, Louisville Veterans Affairs Hospital Eleanor Lederer, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American Association for the Advancement of Science International Society of Nephrology American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology American Federation for Medical Research American Society for Bone and Mineral Research American Society of Nephrology American Society of Transplantation Kentucky Medical Association National Kidney Foundation Phi Beta Kappa Disclosure: Received grant/research funds from Dept of Veterans Affairs for research; Received salary from American Society of Nephrology for asn council position; Received salary from University of Louisville for employment; Received salary from University of Louisville Physicians for employment; Received contract payment from American Physician Institute for Advanced Professional Studies, LLC for independent contractor; Received contract payment from Healthcare Quality Strategies, Inc for independent cont. 
       Chief Editor 
         Vecihi Batuman, MD, FACP, FASN Huberwald Professor of Medicine, Section of Nephrology-Hypertension, Tulane University School of Medicine; Chief, Renal Section, Southeast Louisiana Veterans Health Care System Vecihi Batuman, MD, FACP, FASN is a member of the following medical societies:  American College of Physicians American Society of Hypertension American Society of Nephrology International Society of Nephrology Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Additional Contributors 
         James H Sondheimer, MD, FACP, FASN Associate Professor of Medicine, Wayne State University School of Medicine; Medical Director of Hemodialysis, Harper University Hospital at Detroit Medical Center; Medical Director, DaVita Greenview Dialysis (Southfield) James H Sondheimer, MD, FACP, FASN is a member of the following medical societies:  American College of Physicians American Society of Nephrology Disclosure: Received dialysis unit medical director fee from Davita for independent contractor. 
     
       Barclay L, Nainggolan L. New European Guidelines Address Hyponatremia Management. Medscape Medical News. Available at  http://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/821130 
       [Guideline] Spasovski G,  Vanholder R,  Allolio B,  Annane D,  Ball S,  Bichet D, et al. Clinical practice guideline on diagnosis and treatment of hyponatraemia.  Nephrol Dial Transplant [Medline] 
       Zenenberg RD, Carluccio AL, Merlin MA. Hyponatremia: evaluation and management.  Hosp Pract (Minneap) [Medline] 
       Zeidel ML. Hyponatremia: mechanisms and newer treatments.  Endocr Pract [Medline] 
       Singhi S, Jayashre M. Free water excess is not the main cause for hyponatremia in critically ill children receiving conventional maintenance fluids.  Indian Pediatr [Medline] 
       Gross P, Reimann D, Henschkowski J, Damian M. Treatment of severe hyponatremia: conventional and novel aspects.  J Am Soc Nephrol [Medline] 
       Dubois GD, Arieff AI. Treatment of hyponatremia: the case for rapid correction. Narins RG, ed.  Controversies in Nephrology and Hypertension 
       Goldberg A, Hammerman H, Petcherski S, et al. Prognostic importance of hyponatremia in acute ST-elevation myocardial infarction.  Am J Med [Medline] 
       Heuman DM, Abou-Assi SG, Habib A, Williams LM, Stravitz RT, Sanyal AJ. Persistent ascites and low serum sodium identify patients with cirrhosis and low MELD scores who are at high risk for early death.  Hepatology [Medline] 
       Kim MY, Baik SK, Yea CJ, et al. Hepatic venous pressure gradient can predict the development of hepatocellular carcinoma and hyponatremia in decompensated alcoholic cirrhosis.  Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol [Medline] 
       Bettari L,  Fiuzat M,  Shaw LK,  Wojdyla DM,  Metra M,  Felker GM, et al. Hyponatremia and long-term outcomes in chronic heart failure-an observational study from the duke databank for cardiovascular diseases.  J Card Fail [Medline] 
       Hillier TA, Abbott RD, Barrett EJ. Hyponatremia: evaluating the correction factor for hyperglycemia.  Am J Med [Medline] 
       Issa MM, Young MR, Bullock AR, Bouet R, Petros JA. Dilutional hyponatremia of TURP syndrome: a historical event in the 21st century.  Urology [Medline] 
       Palmer BF. Hyponatraemia in a neurosurgical patient: syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion versus cerebral salt wasting.  Nephrol Dial Transplant [Medline] 
       Palmer BF. Hyponatremia in patients with central nervous system disease: SIADH versus CSW.  Trends Endocrinol Metab [Medline] 
       Smith D, Moore K, Tormey W, Baylis PH, Thompson CJ. Downward resetting of the osmotic threshold for thirst in patients with SIADH.  Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab [Medline] 
       Skippen P, Adderley R, Bennett M, et al. Iatrogenic hyponatremia in hospitalized children: Can it be avoided?.  Paediatr Child Health [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Thaler SM, Teitelbaum I, Berl T. "Beer potomania" in non-beer drinkers: effect of low dietary solute intake.  Am J Kidney Dis [Medline] 
       Goldman MB, Luchins DJ, Robertson GL. Mechanisms of altered water metabolism in psychotic patients with polydipsia and hyponatremia.  N Engl J Med [Medline] 
       Kratz A, Siegel AJ, Verbalis JG, et al. Sodium status of collapsed marathon runners.  Arch Pathol Lab Med [Medline] 
       Almond CS, Shin AY, Fortescue EB, et al. Hyponatremia among runners in the Boston Marathon.  N Engl J Med [Medline] 
       Hew-Butler T, Almond C, Ayus JC, et al. Consensus statement of the 1st International Exercise-Associated Hyponatremia Consensus Development Conference, Cape Town, South Africa 2005.  Clin J Sport Med [Medline] 
       Baker J, Cotter JD, Gerrard DF, Bell ML, Walker RJ. Effects of indomethacin and celecoxib on renal function in athletes.  Med Sci Sports Exerc [Medline] 
       Feldman BJ, Rosenthal SM, Vargas GA, et al. Nephrogenic syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis.  N Engl J Med [Medline] 
       Trivelli A, Ghiggeri GM, Canepa A, Oddone M, Bava G, Perfumo F. Hyponatremic-hypertensive syndrome with extensive and reversible renal defects.  Pediatr Nephrol [Medline] 
       Sherlock M, O'Sullivan E, Agha A, et al. Incidence and pathophysiology of severe hyponatraemia in neurosurgical patients.  Postgrad Med J [Medline] 
       [Guideline] Verbalis JG,  Goldsmith SR,  Greenberg A,  Korzelius C,  Schrier RW,  Sterns RH, et al. Diagnosis, evaluation, and treatment of hyponatremia: expert panel recommendations.  Am J Med [Medline] 
       Adrogue HJ, Madias NE. Hyponatremia.  N Engl J Med [Medline] 
       Vachharajani TJ, Zaman F, Abreo KD. Hyponatremia in critically ill patients.  J Intensive Care Med [Medline] 
       Dixon MB, Lien YH. Tolvaptan and its potential in the treatment of hyponatremia.  Ther Clin Risk Manag [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Farmakis D, Filippatos G, Kremastinos DT, Gheorghiade M. Vasopressin and vasopressin antagonists in heart failure and hyponatremia.  Curr Heart Fail Rep [Medline] 
       FDA drug safety communication - FDA Limits Duration and Usage Due To Possible Liver Injury Leading to Organ Transplant or Death. Available at  http://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch/SafetyInformation/SafetyAlertsforHumanMedicalProducts/ucm350185.htm 
       Ayus JC, Wheeler JM, Arieff AI. Postoperative hyponatremic encephalopathy in menstruant women.  Ann Intern Med [Medline] 
       Ruzek KA, Campeau NG, Miller GM. Early diagnosis of central pontine myelinolysis with diffusion-weighted imaging.  AJNR Am J Neuroradiol [Medline] 
       Yu J, Zheng SS, Liang TB, Shen Y, Wang WL, Ke QH. Possible causes of central pontine myelinolysis after liver transplantation.  World J Gastroenterol [Medline] 
       Doshi SM, Shah P, Lei X, Lahoti A, Salahudeen AK. Hyponatremia in hospitalized cancer patients and its impact on clinical outcomes.  Am J Kidney Dis [Medline] 
       Corona G, Giuliani C, Verbalis JG, Forti G, Maggi M, Peri A. Hyponatremia improvement is associated with a reduced risk of mortality: evidence from a meta-analysis.  PLoS One [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Budisavljevic MN, Stewart L, Sahn SA, Ploth DW. Hyponatremia associated with 3,4-methylenedioxymethylamphetamine ("Ecstasy") abuse.  Am J Med Sci [Medline] 
       FDA Limits Use of Samsca (Tolvaptan) Due to Liver Injury Risk. Medscape Medical News. Available at  http://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/803356 
       Gines P, Berl T, Bernardi M, et al. Hyponatremia in cirrhosis: from pathogenesis to treatment.  Hepatology [Medline] 
       Glassock RJ, Cohen AH, Danovitch G, Parsa KP. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection and the kidney.  Ann Intern Med [Medline] 
       Konstam MA, Gheorghiade M, Burnett JC Jr, Grinfeld L, Maggioni AP, Swedberg K. Effects of oral tolvaptan in patients hospitalized for worsening heart failure: the EVEREST Outcome Trial.  JAMA [Medline] 
       Lowes R. Tolvaptan Poses Risk for Serious Liver Damage, FDA Warns. Medscape Medical News. January 25, 2013. Available at  http://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/778200 
       Pham PC, Pham PM, Pham PT. Vasopressin excess and hyponatremia.  Am J Kidney Dis [Medline] 
       Salahudeen AK, Ali N, George M, Lahoti A, Palla S. Tolvaptan in hospitalized cancer patients with hyponatremia: A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial on efficacy and safety. Cancer. Wiley Online Library. Available at  http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cncr.28468/abstract 
       Santos BC, Chevaile A, Hebert MJ, Zagajeski J, Gullans SR. A combination of NaCl and urea enhances survival of IMCD cells to hyperosmolality.  Am J Physiol [Medline] 
       Saunders R. Tolvaptan Corrects Hyponatremia in Cancer Patients. Medscape [serial online]. Available at  http://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/814821 
       Schrier RW, Abraham WT. Hormones and hemodynamics in heart failure.  N Engl J Med [Medline] 
       Schrier RW, Gross P, Gheorghiade M, et al. Tolvaptan, a selective oral vasopressin V2-receptor antagonist, for hyponatremia.  N Engl J Med [Medline] 
       Silver SM, Kozlowski SA, Baer JE, Rogers SJ, Sterns RH. Glycine-induced hyponatremia in the rat: a model of post-prostatectomy syndrome.  Kidney Int [Medline] 
       Silver SM, Schroeder BM, Bernstein P, Sterns RH. Brain adaptation to acute hyponatremia in young rats.  Am J Physiol [Medline] 
       Sterns RH. The syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion of unknown origin.  Am J Kidney Dis [Medline] 
       McCall B. US and Europe Differ on Use of Vaptans in Hyponatremia. Medscape Medical News. Available at  http://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/845338

Article 21:

   
     Hysterectomy 
       Hysterectomy: Background, History of the Procedure, Problem Hysterectomy Workup: Laboratory Studies Hysterectomy Treatment & Management: Medical Therapy, Surgical Therapy, Postoperative Details 
       Hysterectomy: Background, History of the Procedure, Problem Hysterectomy Workup: Laboratory Studies Hysterectomy Treatment & Management: Medical Therapy, Surgical Therapy, Postoperative Details 
       Overview
 Background History of the Procedure Problem Epidemiology Presentation Indications Relevant Anatomy Contraindications Workup
 Laboratory Studies Treatment
 Medical Therapy Surgical Therapy Postoperative Details Follow-up Complications Future and Controversies 
       Hysterectomy Overview Hysterectomy Workup Hysterectomy Treatment 267273-overview Jan 22, 2015 2015-08-13-15:04 0 Clinical Procedures 2002 Procedures Procedure 
       1 2 content 267273 503 3003432 16 sex_o 
     Jun 04, 2015 
       procedure Procedures 
       clinical_procedures Clinical Procedures 
       clinical_procedures_obgyn Obstetric and Gynecologic uterine disease, gynecologic dysfunction, sterility, total abdominal hysterectomy, TAH, fibroids, leiomyomas, LAVH, vaginal hysterectomy, VH, benign uterine tumor, endometriosis, genital prolapse, uterine prolapse, pelvic relaxation, uterine cancer, uterus cancer, cancer of uterus, endometrial cancer, cervical cancer, cervix cancer, radical hysterectomy, vaginectomy, UAE, da Vinci hysterectomy, endometrial ablation, progesterone-containing IUD Hysterectomy is the most common non–pregnancy-related major surgery performed on women in the United States. This surgical procedure involves removal of the uterus and cervix, and for some conditions, the fallopian tubes and ovaries. 0 
       BSO TAH Hysterectomy 
     Overview 
       Background 
         Hysterectomy is the most common non–pregnancy-related major surgery performed on women in the United States. This surgical procedure involves removal of the uterus and cervix, and for some conditions, the fallopian tubes and ovaries. Reasons for choosing this operation are treatment of uterine cancer and various common noncancerous uterine conditions such as fibroids, endometriosis, prolapse that leads to disabling levels of pain, discomfort, uterine bleeding, and emotional stress. Although this procedure is highly successful in curing the disease of concern, it is a surgical alternative with the accompanying risks, morbidity, and mortality that an operative procedure carries and it leads to sterility in women who are premenopausal. The patient may be hospitalized for several days and may require 6-12 weeks of convalescence. Complications, such as excessive bleeding, infection, and injury to adjacent organs, also may occur. For related information, see Medscape's  Women's Sexual Health 
       History of the Procedure 
         In November 1843, Charles Clay performed the first hysterectomy in Manchester, England. In 1929, Richardson, MD, performed the first total abdominal hysterectomy (TAH), in which the entire uterus and cervix were removed. [ 
       Problem 
         Epidemiology of fibroids Fibroids, or leiomyomas, account for one third of hysterectomies and one fifth of gynecological visits, and they create an annual cost of $1.2 billion. [ [ [ The frequency of fibroid appearance in African American women is 2-3 times higher than in white women. Women who are obese or experience menarche when younger than 12 years are at increased risk of fibroid development due to prolonged exposure to estrogen. Women who have had children are at a lesser risk for fibroid development than women who have never been pregnant. [ Each fibroid arises from a single monoclonal cell line from the smooth-muscle cells of the myometrium. [ [ Asymptomatic fibroids are relatively slow growing and characterize most of the tumors found in patients. Previously, uterine size (consisting of asymptomatic fibroids) equivalent to 12 weeks' gestation (280 g) had been the standard threshold for recommending a hysterectomy. Thus, asymptomatic fibroids of smaller size were handled via observation, with an annual pelvic examination and/or transvaginal ultrasonography.  Currently, surgical procedures are not recommended for fibroids based on uterine size alone in the absence of symptoms. According to Reiter et al, no increased incidence in perioperative morbidity existed posthysterectomy in those women with a fibroid uterus larger than 12 weeks' gestational size compared to those women with a fibroid uterus smaller than 12 weeks' gestational size. [ In patients who experience symptoms with fibroids, the symptoms are related to the size, location, and number of fibroids within the uterus. As many as one third of patients with symptomatic uterine fibroids experience abnormal bleeding, cramping, and prolonged and heavy menstrual periods, which can result in anemia. The growth of fibroids to large sizes may cause pressure on local organs; thus, presenting symptoms may include pelvic pain or pressure, pain during sexual intercourse, reduced urinary capacity due to increased bladder pressure, constipation due to increased colon pressure, and infertility or late miscarriages. [ 
         Epidemiology of endometriosis Endometriosis is responsible for approximately one fifth of hysterectomies, and it affects women during their reproductive years. [ [ Currently, no cure exists for endometriosis. Although many women seek hysterectomy for pain relief, it does not provide a definite cure because some women in whom one or both ovaries are preserved may continue to experience problems with endometriosis that was left behind.  
         Epidemiology of pelvic relaxation Genital prolapse is the indication for approximately 15% of hysterectomies. Various stresses on the pelvic muscles and ligaments can cause significant weakening and, thus, uterine prolapse. The prime cause of insult to the pelvic support structures is childbirth. Therefore, multiple pregnancies and vaginal deliveries increase the risk for uterine prolapse. A few less dramatic causes of increased pelvic pressure include straining during bowel movements, chronic coughing, and obesity. Also, significant pelvic structure weakening occurs postmenopause because estrogen, which pelvic tissues need to maintain their tonicity, is not present in significant amounts after menopause.  Women with mild pelvic relaxation may be free of symptoms. However, patients with moderate-to-severe relaxation may experience symptoms that include heaviness and pressure in the vaginal area; low back pain, leakage of urine, which can worsen during heavy lifting, coughing, laughing, or sneezing; urinary tract infections; retention of urine; and problems with sexual intercourse. [ 
         Epidemiology of cancer of reproductive organs Cancer of the uterus, or endometrial cancer, is the most common gynecological cancer in the United States, with an estimated 36,100 new cases in 2000. [ Stage 1 endometrial cancer is confined to the corpus, or body, of the uterus. Symptoms may include bleeding between periods or, as is in most cases, spotting in patients after menopause. Stage 1 endometrial cancer is very slow growing and highly curable. A hysterectomy is the preferred method of treatment. Not only is the uterus removed, but the ovaries and fallopian tubes also are removed because ovaries are a possible site for more cancer, or they may secrete hormones that play a synergistic role in the growth of the cancer. Surgical menopause due to bilateral oophorectomy compared to natural menopause does not increase all-cause, cardiovascular, or cancer mortality. [ In stage 2 endometrial cancer, the cancer has spread to the cervix. Approximately 12,800 new cases of cervical cancer diagnoses occur annually in the United States. [ In stage 3A endometrial cancer, the cancer has spread to the ovaries and fallopian tubes. This may be treated with a TAH and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy (removal of the uterus, fallopian tubes, and ovaries), along with chemotherapy or radiotherapy if needed. In stage 3B, the cancer has spread to the vagina. In this case, a vaginectomy or radical hysterectomy must be performed, along with chemotherapy or radiotherapy if needed. By stage 3C, the cancer has entered the lymph nodes. In this case, lymph node dissection and hysterectomy is the treatment of choice, along with chemotherapy or radiotherapy if needed.  
       Epidemiology 
         Frequency Approximately 600,000 hysterectomies are performed annually in the United States, with a cost of approximately $5 billion per year.  The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimated 3.1 million US women had a hysterectomy from 2000-2004. 
           
             The hysterectomy rate decreased slightly from 5.4/1000 in 2000 to 5.1/1000 in 2004. 
             From 2000-2004, rates of hysterectomy differed by age. Overall rates were highest among women aged 40-44 years and lowest among women aged 15-24 years. Hysterectomy rates among women aged 50-54 years decreased significantly from 8.9/1000 in 2000 to 6.7/1000 in 2004.  
             Hysterectomy rates also differed by geographic region. The overall rate was highest for women living in the South (6.3/1000) and lowest for those in the Northeast (4.3/1000). Hysterectomy rates in the Northeast decreased from 4.9/1000 in 2000 to 3.7/1000 in 2004.  
             From 2000-2004, the most common medical reasons for undergoing a hysterectomy included benign fibroid tumors, endometriosis, and uterine prolapse. Uterine cancer was not as common but is an important reason for undergoing a hysterectomy.  
             The proportion of hysterectomies with an indication of uterine leiomyoma decreased from 44.2% in 2003 to 38.7% in 2004. The relative proportions of all hysterectomies performed as laparoscopically assisted vaginal hysterectomy (LAVH) peaked at 13% in 1995 and then steadily declined to 3.9% in 2003 ( p < 0.001), p 
       Presentation 
         Preoperative evaluation includes the following: 
           
             Complete history and physical: Evaluate, in detail, any comorbid conditions such as diabetes mellitus, hypertension, cardiac disease, or asthma.  
             Medication history such as use of aspirin, oral hypoglycemics, heparin, or warfarin 
             PAP smear, endometrial sampling, ultrasonography, CBC count, blood type and cross match, and, depending upon age and risk factors, ECG and chest radiograph.  
             In case of malignancy, preoperative staging can be determined with the help of biopsies, CAT scans, IVP, cystoscopy, barium enema, etc.  
       Indications 
         Reasons for choosing hysterectomy are treatment of  uterine cancer ovarian cancer cervical cancer endometriosis uterine prolapse 
       Relevant Anatomy 
         Various hysterectomy procedures are available, including the following:  
           
             Total abdominal hysterectomy involves removal of the uterus and cervix through an abdominal incision. 
             Supracervical or subtotal hysterectomy is removal of the uterus through an abdominal incision, while sparing the cervix. 
             Radical hysterectomy is extensive surgery that, in addition to removal of the uterus and cervix, might include removal of lymph nodes, loose areolar tissue near major blood vessels, upper vagina, and omentum.  
             Oophorectomy and salpingo-oophorectomy: Oophorectomy is the surgical removal of the ovary and salpingo-oophorectomy is the removal of the ovary and the fallopian tube.  
             Vaginal hysterectomy is removal of the uterus and the cervix through the vagina. 
             Laparoscopy-assisted vaginal hysterectomy is vaginal hysterectomy with the help of laparoscopy. The uterus is the inverted pear-shaped female reproductive organ that lies in the midline of the body, within the pelvis between the bladder and the rectum. It is a dynamic female reproductive organ that is responsible for several reproductive functions, including menses, implantation, gestation, labor, and delivery. It is responsive to the hormonal milieu within the body, which allows adaptation to the different stages of a woman’s reproductive life. The uterus adjusts to reflect changes in ovarian steroid production during the menstrual cycle and displays rapid growth and specialized contractile activity during pregnancy and childbirth. It can also remain in a relatively quiescent state during the prepubertal and postmenopausal years.  The ovaries are small, oval-shaped, and grayish in color, with an uneven surface. The actual size of an ovary depends on a woman’s age and hormonal status; the ovaries, covered by a modified peritoneum, are approximately 3-5 cm in length during childbearing years and become much smaller and then atrophic once menopause occurs. A cross-section of the ovary reveals many cystic structures that vary in size. These structures represent ovarian follicles at different stages of development and degeneration.  For more information about the relevant anatomy, see  Female Reproductive Organ Anatomy Uterus Anatomy Ovary Anatomy 
       Contraindications 
         Vaginal hysterectomy is contraindicated in only 10-20% of cases, eg, uterine size greater than 280 g [ 
     Workup 
       Laboratory Studies 
         Lab studies related to hysterectomy include CBC count, Papanicolaou test, endometrial sampling, ultrasonography, blood type and cross match, and, in some cases, chest radiography, ECG, CAT scan, MRI, cystoscopy, barium enema, IVP, blood chemistry, tumor markers. 
     Treatment & Management 
       Medical Therapy 
         Although hysterectomy is often the definitive treatment for many pelvic pathologies, nonsurgical alternatives should always be attempted in elective cases. Hormonal therapy, gonadotropin-releasing hormone antagonists, progesterone-containing IUD, endometrial ablation, focused ultrasonographic surgery, cryotherapy, and uterine artery embolization have been used with success. In the 6 states studied, the diffusion of endometrial ablation has had a varying impact on hysterectomy rates among women with benign uterine conditions. However, endometrial ablation is used as an additive medical technology rather than a substitute.  
       Surgical Therapy 
         Please see the algorithm below. 
           Algorithm for selecting route of hysterectomy.  Algorithm for selecting route of hysterectomy.  
         Abdominal hysterectomy In November 1843, Charles Clay performed the first hysterectomy in Manchester, England. The earliest hysterectomies were supracervical, or subtotal, hysterectomies. The body of the uterus was removed while the cervix remained intact. In 1929, Richardson, MD, performed the first TAH, in which the entire uterus was removed. [ Prior to an abdominal hysterectomy, the patient undergoes a regional or general anesthetic. A patient remains awake during a regional anesthetic, with only part of the body being numbed to prevent pain. When given a general anesthetic, the patient is unconscious. In the absence of contraindications, neuraxial anesthesia provides a better quality of recovery than general anesthesia. [ The abdominal hysterectomy begins via a surgical incision 6-8 inches long, made either vertically, running from the navel to the pubic bone, or horizontally, running along the top of the pubic hairline. The cut exposes the ligaments and blood vessels surrounding the uterus. These ligaments and blood vessels then are separated from the uterus and cervix. In the process, the blood vessels are tied off to prevent bleeding and to help in healing. The uterus and cervix are then cut off at the superior portion of the vagina and removed. The top of the vaginal cuff is closed with sutures, and the surgical wound is closed in layers. An abdominal hysterectomy may be performed in conjunction with a salpingo-oophorectomy, in which the adnexa are removed, if needed. Possible complications include surgical wound infection; excessive bleeding; injury to the bowel, bladder, or ureter; nerve damage; and urinary tract infection. Candidates for this surgery include those who have fibroids, abnormal or heavy bleeding, chronic pelvic pain, endometriosis, adenomyosis (endometrial tissue that has infiltrated the myometrium), uterine prolapse, cancer of the reproductive organs, or pelvic inflammatory disease.  
         Vaginal hysterectomy In a vaginal hysterectomy, the uterus is removed through the vaginal introitus. Prior to surgery, the patient is given a regional or a general anesthetic and the skin surrounding the vagina is prepped with an antibacterial solution. A surgical incision is then made in a circular fashion around the cervix and through the upper vagina to expose the tissue and blood vessels around the cervix and uterus. The tissues and vessels are cut and tied off for the uterus and cervix to be removed from the top of the vagina. The upper part of the vagina, where the surgical incision was made, is then sutured.  Possible complications include surgical wound infection; excessive bleeding; injury to the bowel, bladder, or ureter; nerve damage; and urinary tract infection. Often, colporrhaphy (reconstructive surgery) is performed to repair or prevent cystocele, rectocele, and/or vaginal vault prolapse. Candidates for this surgery include those who have fibroids, abnormal or heavy bleeding, adenomyosis, uterine prolapse, early-stage cancer of the reproductive organs, or precancerous conditions of reproductive organs.  
         Laparoscopically assisted vaginal hysterectomy Laparoscopically assisted vaginal hysterectomy (LAVH) is a procedure that uses laparoscopic surgical techniques and instruments to remove the uterus, cervix, and/or fallopian tubes and ovaries through the vagina. Prior to surgery, the patient is usually given a general anesthetic and the abdomen and vagina are prepared with an antibacterial solution.  LAVH begins with several small abdominal incisions inferior to the belly button, which allow the insertion of the laparoscope and other surgical tools. In order for the surgeon to observe the inside of the body clearly, the peritoneal cavity is inflated with gas (usually carbon dioxide), and a camera, which is attached to the laparoscope, captures and produces a continuous image that is magnified and projected onto a television screen. Using the laparoscopic surgical tools, the tissues and vessels surrounding the uterus are cut and tied off. The uterus and cervix are then removed through the vagina, and the top of the vaginal cuff is sutured. The fallopian tubes and ovaries also may be removed during this surgical procedure.  Possible complications include surgical wound infection; excessive bleeding; injury to the bowel, bladder, or ureter; nerve damage; and urinary tract infection. Candidates for this surgery include those who have had previous abdominal surgery, large fibroids, chronic pelvic pain, endometriosis, or pelvic inflammatory disease, or those who want an oophorectomy. Today, robotic laparoscopic surgery, such as procedures involving the da Vinci Surgical Robot, is also being refined to evaluate the performance of LAVH. 
         Laparoscopic hysterectomy Laparoscopic hysterectomy (LH) is a procedure in which the uterus and cervix are dissected and ligated from ligaments, tissues, vagina, and blood vessels and removed entirely from small abdominal incisions with the help of instruments like the morcellator. This procedure requires good surgical technique, intra and extracorporal sutures, and different hemostatic devices. A meta-analysis showed no difference between total LH and vaginal hysterectomy for benign disease in perioperative complications. [ 
         Supracervical hysterectomy Supracervical hysterectomy is defined as removal of the uterine corpus with preservation of the cervix and can be performed through abdominal, laparoscopic, or robotic approaches. During supracervical hysterectomy, removal of the corpus is at or below the internal os along with ablation of the endocervical canal. During laparoscopic and robotically assisted hysterectomy, morcellation of the uterine fundus is performed to facilitate its removal through the port site incisions. Women with known or suspected gynecological cancer, current or recent cervical dysplasia, or endometrial hyperplasia are not candidates for a supracervical procedure. Evidence regarding the potential benefits of this procedure like less blood loss, shorter operating time, and fewer complications are limited to retrospective series. Patients should be counseled about the need for long-term follow up, the possibility of future trachelectomy, and the lack of data demonstrating clear benefits over total hysterectomy; hence, it should not be recommended by the surgeon as a superior technique for hysterectomy for benign diseases. [ 
         Robot-assisted hysterectomy Da Vinci surgical system was approved for use in gynecological surgery by FDA in 2005. Da Vinci hysterectomy involves a robotic system in which the surgeon's hands are naturally positioned while his or her fingers grasp the controls below the display, and movements are transferred in real time to surgical instruments inside the patient. This system is useful when the surgery involves dissection in a difficult situation, such as near the ureters, bladder, or blood vessels. The current system consists of 4 components: (1) console where the surgeon sits and views the screen and controls the robotic instruments, (2) robotic cart with interactive arms, (3) camera and vision system, (4) wristed instruments with computer interfaces. Advantages are 3-dimensional visualization with improved depth of perception, improved dexterity, less blood loss, shorter hospital stay, less pain, and less risk of wound infection. Disadvantages include high cost, increased operating time associated with set up and docking, lack of tactile feedback, inability to reposition the patient once the robotic arms are attached, and the bulkiness of the system. [ 
         Comparisons of hysterectomy procedures With the various hysterectomy procedures available, physicians must limit healthcare dollars associated with these surgical procedures while maintaining quality health care for patients. Various studies have been performed to decide which surgical procedure is most suitable in terms of economics and patient health.  The severity of the pathological disorder must be the key standard in selecting the type of hysterectomy, in order to maintain optimum surgical practice. In studies performed in the United States, France, and the United Kingdom in which strict guidelines based on the severity of the pathological disorder have been implemented, most patients underwent successful vaginal hysterectomy without abdominal or laparoscopic assistance. [ In a study by Gimbel et al subtotal hysterectomy is faster to perform, has less perioperative bleeding, and seems to have less intra- and postoperative complications. [ Significantly improved outcomes suggest vaginal hysterectomy (VH) should be performed in preference to abdominal hysterectomy (AH) where possible. Where VH is not possible, LH may avoid the need for AH; however, the length of the surgery increases as the extent of the surgery performed laparoscopically increases, particularly when the uterine arteries are divided laparoscopically. Also, laparoscopic approaches require greater surgical expertise. [ Four-year follow-up data indicate that patients who underwent laparoscopic hysterectomy reported a better quality of life compared to those who underwent AH. Laparoscopic hysterectomy should be considered for patients in whom VH is not possible. [ 
       Postoperative Details 
         Early feeding (oral intake of fluids or food within 24 h of surgery, irrespective of bowel sounds) after major abdominal gynecological surgery is safe and associated with reduced length of hospital stay but increased nausea. Further studies should focus on the cost effectiveness, patient satisfaction, and other physiological changes. [ 
       Follow-up 
         After the surgery, it takes 4-6 weeks to recover. Recovery is earlier in cases of vaginal hysterectomy and laparoscopically assisted vaginal hysterectomy.  No lifting anything heavy for 6 weeks after the surgery. In case of oophorectomy in premenopausal women, patients experience menopausal symptoms like hot flashes, vaginal dryness, and mood disturbances.  Return to normal sexual activities is expected after 6 weeks of surgery. For excellent patient education resources, see eMedicineHealth's patient education articles  Cervical Cancer Female Sexual Problems Pain During Intercourse 
       Complications 
         Possible complications of hysterectomy include surgical wound infection; excessive bleeding; injury to the bowel, bladder, ureter, or major blood vessel; urinary tract infection, nerve damage, postoperative thromboembolism, atelectasis, early onset of menopause, and loss of ovarian function. In a 2012 prospective study, hysterectomy with bilateral oophorectomy, compared with hysterectomy with ovarian conservation or natural menopause, was associated with greater increases in BMI in the years following the procedure. [ Hur et al found that the 10-year cumulative incidence of dehiscence after any type of hysterectomy was 0.24% and 1.35% after total laparoscopic hysterectomies. [ A study by Dessources et al found that postoperative complications were the strongest risk factors for 30-day hospital readmission following hysterectomy, including in women with uterine cancer and in those who underwent hysterectomy for benign conditions. Complications related to readmission included wound complications, infections, and pulmonary emboli and myocardial infarctions, with the 30-day readmission rate being 6.1% among women with uterine cancer and 3.4% for those with a benign disease. [ 
       Future and Controversies 
         As more pharmacologic and invasive radiologic interventions become available, the number of hysterectomies performed in the United States and abroad will continue to decrease. Compared with hysterectomy, uterine artery embolization (UAE) was associated with higher rates of minor postprocedural complications such as vaginal discharge, postpuncture hematoma, and postembolization syndrome (pain, fever, nausea, vomiting), as well as higher unscheduled visits and readmission rates after discharge. No evidence shows a benefit of UAE over surgery(hysterectomy/myomectomy) for satisfaction. Currently, the ongoing trials REST (UK) and EMMY have yet to report on the long-term follow-up. [ Not only will surgical techniques continue to be updated and improved, but preoperative and postoperative interventions will improve morbidity, mortality, and quality of life.  Because the uterus is associated with femininity, some women experience a sense of loss after a hysterectomy. However, some women find a hysterectomy enhances their quality of life because it provides relief of symptoms and definite contraception. Hysterectomy, whether total or subtotal, may improve quality of life and psychological outcome. [ 
     start media 
       
         Algorithm for selecting route of hysterectomy.  Algorithm for selecting route of hysterectomy.  
     
       Author 
         Hetal B Gor, MD, FACOG Obstetrician/Gynecologist, Private Practice Hetal B Gor, MD, FACOG is a member of the following medical societies:  American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists Society of Laparoendoscopic Surgeons Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Chief Editor 
         Michel E Rivlin, MD Former Professor, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Mississippi School of Medicine Michel E Rivlin, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists American Medical Association Mississippi State Medical Association Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
     Acknowledgements 
       Gloria Bachmann, MD, Disclosure: Wyeth Grant/research funds PI on research; Bayer; Grant/research funds PI on research; GSK Grant/research funds PI on research; Duramed Grant/research funds PI on research; Novartis Grant/research funds PI on research; Pfizer Grant/research funds PI on research; Boehringer-Ingelheim Grant/research funds PI on research; Johnson and Johnson Grant/research funds PI on research; Roche Grant/research funds PI on research; Boston Scientific Grant/research funds PI on research; Novo Nordisk Grant/research funds PI on research; Proctor and Gamble Grant/research funds PI on research; Merck Grant/research funds PI on research; Xanodyne Grant/research funds PI on research; Hormos Grant/research funds PI on research  Francisco Talavera, PharmD, PhD Disclosure: Medscape Reference Salary Employment 
     
       Johns A. Supracervical versus total hysterectomy.  Clin Obstet Gynecol [Medline] 
       Lepine LA, Hillis SD, Marchbanks PA. Hysterectomy surveillance--United States, 1980-1993.  Mor Mortal Wkly Rep CDC Surveill Summ [Medline] 
       Zhao SZ, Wong JM, Arguelles LM. Hospitalization costs associated with leiomyoma.  Clin Ther [Medline] 
       Goodwin SC, Wong GC. Uterine artery embolization for uterine fibroids: a radiologist's perspective.  Clin Obstet Gynecol [Medline] 
       Kjerulff KH, Erickson BA, Langenberg PW. Chronic gynecological conditions reported by US women: findings from  the National Health Interview Survey, 1984 to 1992.  Am J Public Health [Medline] 
       Guarnaccia MM, Rein MS. Traditional surgical approaches to uterine fibroids: abdominal  myomectomy and hysterectomy.  Clin Obstet Gynecol [Medline] 
       Demello AB. Uterine artery embolization.  AORN J [Medline] 
       Townsend DE, Sparkes RS, Baluda MC. Unicellular histogenesis of uterine leiomyomas as determined by  electrophoresis by glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase.  Am J Obstet Gynecol [Medline] 
       Gross KL, Morton CC. Genetics and the development of fibroids.  Clin Obstet Gynecol [Medline] 
       Reiter RC, Gambone JC, Lench JB. Appropriateness of hysterectomies performed for multiple preoperative  indications.  Obstet Gynecol [Medline] 
       Lee NC, Dicker RC, Rubin GL. Confirmation of the preoperative diagnoses for hysterectomy.  Am J Obstet Gynecol [Medline] 
       Weir E. The public health toll of endometriosis.  CMAJ 
       Greenlee RT, Murray T, Bolden S. Cancer statistics, 2000.  CA Cancer J Clin [Medline] 
       Duan L,  Xu X,  Koebnick C,  Lacey JV Jr,  Sullivan-Halley J,  Templeman C, et al. Bilateral oophorectomy is not associated with increased mortality: the California Teachers Study.  Fertil Steril [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Sawaya GF, Brown AD, Washington AE. Clinical practice. Current approaches to cervical-cancer screening.  N Engl J Med [Medline] 
       Kovac SR. Which route for hysterectomy? Evidence-based outcomes guide selection.  Postgrad Med [Medline] 
       Catro-Alves LJ, De Azevedo VL, De Freitas Braga TF, Goncalves AC, De Oliveira GS Jr. The effect of neuraxial versus general anesthesia techniques on postoperative quality of recovery and analgesia after abdominal hysterectomy: a prospective, randomized, controlled trial.  Anesth Analg [Medline] 
       Gendy R, Walsh CA, Walsh SR, Karantanis E. Vaginal hysterectomy versus total laparoscopic hysterectomy for benign disease: a metaanalysis of randomized controlled trials.  Am J Obstet Gynecol [Medline] 
       ACOG Committee Opinion No. 388 November 2007: supracervical hysterectomy.  Obstet Gynecol [Medline] 
       ACOG Technology Assessment in Obstetrics and Gynecology No. 6: Robot-assisted surgery.  Obstet Gynecol [Medline] 
       Kovac SR. Guidelines to determine the role of laparoscopically assisted vaginal hysterectomy.  Am J Obstet Gynecol [Medline] 
       Gimbel H. Total or subtotal hysterectomy for benign uterine diseases? A meta-analysis.  Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand [Medline] 
       Johnson N, Barlow D, Lethaby A, Tavender E, Curr E, Garry R. Surgical approach to hysterectomy for benign gynaecological disease.  Cochrane Database Syst Rev [Medline] 
       Nieboer TE, Hendriks JC, Bongers MY, Vierhout ME, Kluivers KB. Quality of life after laparoscopic and abdominal hysterectomy: a randomized controlled trial.  Obstet Gynecol [Medline] 
       Charoenkwan K, Phillipson G, Vutyavanich T. Early versus delayed (traditional) oral fluids and food for reducing complications after major abdominal gynaecologic surgery.  Cochrane Database Syst Rev [Medline] 
       Gibson CJ, Thurston RC, El Khoudary SR, Sutton-Tyrrell K, Matthews KA. Body mass index following natural menopause and hysterectomy with and without bilateral oophorectomy.  Int J Obes (Lond) [Medline] 
       Hur HC, Donnellan N, Mansuria S, Barber RE, Guido R, Lee T. Vaginal cuff dehiscence after different modes of hysterectomy.  Obstet Gynecol [Medline] 
       Dessources K, Hou JY, Tergas AI, et al. Factors Associated With 30-Day Hospital Readmission After Hysterectomy.  Obstet Gynecol [Medline] 
       Gupta JK, Sinha AS, Lumsden MA, Hickey M. Uterine artery embolization for symptomatic uterine fibroids.  Cochrane Database Syst Rev [Medline] 
       Thakar R, Ayers S, Georgakapolou A, Clarkson P, Stanton S, Manyonda I. Hysterectomy improves quality of life and decreases psychiatric symptoms: a prospective and randomised comparison of total versus subtotal hysterectomy.  BJOG [Medline] 
       Farquhar CM, Naoom S, Steiner CA. The impact of endometrial ablation on hysterectomy rates in women with benign uterine conditions in the United States.  Int J Technol Assess Health Care [Medline] 
       Jacobson GF, Shaber RE, Armstrong MA, Hung YY. Hysterectomy rates for benign indications.  Obstet Gynecol [Medline]

Article 22:

   
     Esophageal Cancer 
       Esophageal Cancer: Practice Essentials, Background, Pathophysiology Esophageal Cancer Clinical Presentation: History and Physical Examination Esophageal Cancer Workup: Approach Considerations, Imaging Studies, Staging Esophageal Cancer Treatment & Management: Approach Considerations, Surgical Indications and Contraindications, Esophagectomy Esophageal Cancer Medication: Antineoplastics, Antimetabolite, Antineoplastics, Alkylating, Antineoplastics, Antimicrotubular, Antineoplastics, Anthracycline, Antineoplastics, Topoisomerase Inhibitors, Antineoplastics, Other 
       Esophageal Cancer: Practice Essentials, Background, Pathophysiology Esophageal Cancer Clinical Presentation: History and Physical Examination Esophageal Cancer Workup: Approach Considerations, Imaging Studies, Staging Esophageal Cancer Treatment & Management: Approach Considerations, Surgical Indications and Contraindications, Esophagectomy Esophageal Cancer Medication: Antineoplastics, Antimetabolite, Antineoplastics, Alkylating, Antineoplastics, Antimicrotubular, Antineoplastics, Anthracycline, Antineoplastics, Topoisomerase Inhibitors, Antineoplastics, Other 
       Overview
 Practice Essentials Background Pathophysiology Etiology Epidemiology Prognosis Presentation
 History and Physical Examination Workup
 Approach Considerations Imaging Studies Staging Treatment
 Approach Considerations Surgical Indications and Contraindications Esophagectomy Chemoradiotherapy Palliative Care Postoperative Care and Follow-up Prevention of Esophageal Cancer Medication
 
       Esophageal Cancer Overview Esophageal Cancer Clinical Presentation Esophageal Cancer Workup Esophageal Cancer Treatment Esophageal Cancer Medication 277930-overview Mar 03, 2015 2015-08-04-17:34 0 Oncology 2002 Diseases & Conditions Condition 
       1 2 content 277930 502 5005286 7 ssg 
     Jun 04, 2015 
       condition Diseases & Conditions 
       oncology Oncology 
       oncology_gastrointestinal Gastrointestinal Cancers esophageal cancer, esophagus cancer, Barrett epithelium, Barrett's epithelium, Barrett esophagus, Barrett's esophagus, gastrointestinal reflux disease, GERD, esophageal adenocarcinoma, esophagus adenocarcinoma, esophagus carcinoma, esophageal carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma Esophageal cancer is a devastating disease. Although some patients can be cured, the treatment for esophageal cancer is protracted, diminishes quality of life, and is lethal in a significant number of cases. 0 Esophageal Cancer 
     Overview 
       Practice Essentials 
         Esophageal cancer is a disease in epidemiologic transition. Until the 1970s, the most common type of esophageal cancer in the United States was squamous cell carcinoma, which has smoking and alcohol consumption as risk factors; since then, there has been a progressive increase in the incidence of esophageal adenocarcinoma, for which the most common predisposing factor is gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). See the image below. 
           Cascade of events that lead from gastroesophageal reflux disease to adenocarcinoma.  Cascade of events that lead from gastroesophageal reflux disease to adenocarcinoma.  
         Signs and symptoms Presenting signs and symptoms of esophageal cancer include the following: 
           
             Dysphagia (most common); initially for solids, eventually progressing to include liquids 
             Weight loss (second most common) 
             Bleeding 
             Epigastric or retrosternal pain 
             Bone pain with metastatic disease 
             Hoarseness 
             Persistent cough Physical findings include the following: 
           
             Typically, normal examination results unless the cancer has metastasized 
             Hepatomegaly (from hepatic metastases) 
             Lymphadenopathy in the laterocervical or supraclavicular areas (reflecting metastasis) See  Clinical Presentation 
         Diagnosis Laboratory studies focus principally on patient factors that may affect treatment (eg, nutritional status). Imaging studies used for diagnosis and staging include the following: 
           
             Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (allows direct visualization and biopsies of the tumor) 
             Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS; most sensitive test for T and N staging) 
             Computed tomography of the abdomen and chest (for assessing lung and liver metastasis and invasion of adjacent structures) 
             Positron emission tomography (PET) scanning (for staging) 
             Bronchoscopy (to help exclude invasion of the trachea or bronchi) 
             Laparoscopy and thoracoscopy (for staging regional nodes) 
             Barium swallow (very sensitive for detecting strictures and intraluminal masses, but now rarely used) Current TNM classification is as follows (staging is detailed in Table 1, below): 
           
             Tis - Carcinoma in situ/high-grade dysplasia 
             T1 - Lamina propria or submucosa 
             T1a - Lamina propria or muscularis mucosae 
             T1b - Submucosa 
             T2 - Muscularis propria 
             T3 - Adventitia 
             T4 - Adjacent structures 
             T4a - Pleura, pericardium, diaphragm, or adjacent peritoneum 
             T4b - Other adjacent structures (eg, aorta, vertebral body, trachea) 
             N0 - No regional lymph node metastasis 
             N1 - 1-2 regional lymph nodes (N1 is site dependent) 
             N2 - 3-6 regional lymph nodes 
             N3 - More than 6 regional lymph nodes 
             M0 - No distant metastasis 
             M1 - Distant metastasis (M1a and M1b are site dependent) 
           Table 1. Staging Classification. 
             
               
                 Stage IA 
                 T1 
                 N0 
                 M0 
               
                 Stage IB 
                 T2 
                 N0 
                 M0 
               
                 Stage IIA 
                 T3 
                 N0 
                 M0 
               
                 Stage IIB 
                 T1,T2 
                 N1 
                 M0 
               
                 Stage IIIA 
                 T4a 
                 N0 
                 M0 
               
                   
                 T3 
                 N1 
                 M0 
               
                   
                 T1,T2 
                 N2 
                 M0 
               
                 Stage IIIB 
                 T3 
                 N2 
                 M0 
               
                 Stage IIIC 
                 T4a 
                 N1,N2 
                 M0 
               
                   
                 T4b 
                 Any N 
                 M0 
               
                   
                 Any T 
                 N3 
                 M0 
               
                 Stage IV 
                 Any T 
                 Any N 
                 M1 See  Workup 
         Management Treatment of esophageal cancer varies by disease stage, as follows: 
           
             Stage I – Consideration for endoscopic therapy (eg, mucosal resection or submucosal dissection), particularly for Tis and T1aN0 by EUS; consideration for initial surgery for T1b and any N  
             Stages II-III – Consideration for chemoradiation followed by surgery (trimodality therapy) 
             Stage IV – Chemotherapy or symptomatic and supportive care Indications for surgical treatment of esophageal cancer include the following: 
           
             Diagnosis of esophageal cancer in a patient who is a candidate for surgery 
             High-grade dysplasia in a patient with Barrett esophagus that cannot be adequately treated endoscopically [ Contraindications for surgical treatment include the following: 
           
             Metastasis to N2 (celiac, cervical, supraclavicular) nodes or solid organs (eg, liver, lungs) 
             Invasion of adjacent structures (eg, recurrent laryngeal nerve, tracheobronchial tree, aorta, pericardium) 
             Severe associated comorbid conditions (eg, cardiovascular disease, respiratory disease) 
             Impaired cardiac or respiratory function Surgical options include the following: 
           
             Transhiatal esophagectomy (THE) 
             Transthoracic esophagectomy (TTE) 
             Minimally invasive esophagectomy 
             Endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR) Neoadjuvant therapy for esophageal cancer is as follows: 
           
             Combination of radiotherapy and chemotherapy 
             Usually administered over a 45-day period, with esophageal resection after approximately 4 weeks 
             Most chemotherapy agents for esophageal cancer are used off-label Palliative care options for patients who are not candidates for surgery are as follows: 
           
             Chemotherapy 
             Radiotherapy 
             Laser therapy 
             Stents See  Treatment Medication 
       Background 
         Esophageal cancer is a devastating disease. Although some patients can be cured, the treatment for esophageal cancer is protracted, diminishes quality of life, and is lethal in a significant number of cases.  The principal histologic types of esophageal cancer are  squamous cell carcinoma 
         Diagnosis The most common presenting symptom of esophageal cancer is dysphagia (see Presentation). Esophagogastroduodenoscopy allows direct visualization and biopsies of the tumor, while endoscopic ultrasonography is the most sensitive test for determining the depth of penetration of the tumor and the presence of enlarged periesophageal lymph nodes. In patients who appear to have localized esophageal cancer, positron emission tomography (PET) scanning may be useful as part of the baseline staging. Other imaging studies may be valuable in selected patients. (See Workup.)  
         Treatment Surgery has traditionally been the treatment for esophageal carcinoma. The first successful resection was performed in 1913 by Torek. [ esophagectomies [ The ideal treatment for localized esophageal cancer is sometimes debated across practice cultures and subspecialties. Defendants of surgical treatment argue that resection is the only treatment modality to offer curative intent; defendants of the nonsurgical approach claim that esophagectomy has a prohibitive index of mortality and that esophageal cancer is an incurable disease.  
         Differentials Esophageal lesions other than cancer can cause dysphagia. These include peptic strictures from gastroesophageal reflux and benign esophageal tumors (principally  esophageal leiomyoma 
           
             
               Achalasia 
             
               Esophageal stricture 
             
               Gastric cancer 
         Patient education For patient education information, see the  Heartburn and GERD Center Esophageal Cancer (Cancer of the Esophagus) 
         Anatomy The esophagus is a muscular tube that extends from the level of the 7th cervical vertebra to the 11th thoracic vertebra. The esophagus can be divided into the following anatomic parts:  
           
             Cervical esophagus 
             Thoracic esophagus 
             Abdominal esophagus The blood supply of the cervical esophagus is derived from the inferior thyroid artery, while the blood supply for the thoracic esophagus comes from the bronchial arteries and the aorta. The abdominal esophagus is supplied by branches of the left gastric artery and inferior phrenic artery.  Venous drainage of the cervical esophagus is through the inferior thyroid vein, while the thoracic esophagus drains via the azygous vein, the hemiazygous vein, and the bronchial veins. The abdominal esophagus drains through the coronary vein.  The esophagus is characterized by a rich network of lymphatic channels in the submucosa that can facilitate the longitudinal spread of neoplastic cells along the esophageal wall. Lymphatic drainage is to cervical nodes, tracheobronchial and mediastinal nodes, and gastric and celiac nodes. 
       Pathophysiology 
         The progression of Barrett metaplasia to adenocarcinoma is associated with several changes in gene structure, gene expression, and protein structure. [ TP53 erb Casson and colleagues identified mutations in the  TP53 [ 
       Etiology 
         The etiology of esophageal carcinoma is thought to be related to exposure of the esophageal mucosa to noxious or toxic stimuli, resulting in a sequence of dysplasia to carcinoma in situ to carcinoma. In Western cultures, retrospective evidence has implicated cigarette smoking and chronic alcohol exposure as the most common etiologic factors for squamous cell carcinoma. High body mass index, GERD, and resultant Barrett esophagus are often the associated factors for esophageal adenocarcinoma. [ Nutritional deficiencies have been recognized as contributing factors. In high-risk regions such as parts of China and Iran, deficiencies in vitamins (eg, riboflavin) or micronutrients may play a role in causation.  A variety of other factors may promote esophageal cancer. These include the following: 
           
             Caustic injuries 
             Certain foodstuffs (eg, betel nut) 
             Drinking scalding-hot liquids 
             Environmental contributors (eg, nitrosamines in soil) 
             Certain fungi, molds, or yeasts 
             Acquired conditions (eg, achalasia) A genome-wide association study by Wu et al identified seven susceptibility loci on chromosomes 5q11, 6p21, 10q23, 12q24, and 21q22, suggesting the involvement of multiple genetic loci and gene-environment interaction in the development of esophageal cancer. [ Bisphosphonate use can result in esophagitis and has been suggested as a risk factor for esophageal carcinoma. However, a large study found no significant difference in the frequency of esophageal or gastric cancers between the bisphosphonate cohort and the control group. [ 
         Smoking and alcohol use The Netherlands Cohort Study, a prospective study in 120,852 participants, demonstrated the combined effects of smoking and alcohol consumption on risk of squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus. [ No associations were found between alcohol consumption and esophageal adenocarcinoma. In contrast, the risk of squamous cell carcinoma and adenocarcinoma of the esophagus was increased among current smokers. [ A study by Steevens et al found that among current smokers, increased consumption of specific groups of vegetables and fruits were inversely associated with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma and esophageal adenocarcinoma risk. [ 
         Infections Human papillomavirus (HPV) infection has been recognized as a contributing factor to esophageal cancer. However, Sitas et al reported limited serologic evidence of an association between esophageal squamous cell carcinoma and HPV in a study of more than 4000 subjects. The study could not exclude the possibility that certain HPV types may be involved in a small subset of cancers, although HPV does not appear to be an important risk factor. [ Helicobacter pylori 
         Adenocarcinoma and GERD GERD 
           Cascade of events that lead from gastroesophageal reflux disease to adenocarcinoma.  Cascade of events that lead from gastroesophageal reflux disease to adenocarcinoma.  In 1952, Morson and Belcher published the first description of a patient with adenocarcinoma of the esophagus arising in a columnar epithelium with goblet cells. [ [ A nationwide population-based case-control study performed in Sweden found an odds ratio of 7.7 for adenocarcinoma among persons with recurrent symptoms of reflux, as compared with persons without such symptoms, and an odds ratio of 43.5 among patients with long-standing and severe symptoms of reflux. [ Although the annual risk of developing esophageal adenocarcinoma in people with GERD has been reported at 0.5%, some studies have found lower risk. Data from the Northern Ireland Barrett Esophagus Register, which is one of the largest population-based registries in the world, found that the malignant progression among patients with Barrett esophagus was 0.22% per year. This suggests that current surveillance approaches may not be cost effective. [ A study by Hvid-Jensen et al examined a large Danish registry (11,028 patients over a median of 5.2 y) and found the incidence of esophageal adenocarcinoma to be 1.2 cases per 1000 person-years (or 0.12% annual risk). Low-grade dysplasia detected on index endoscopy was associated with an incidence rate of 5.1 cases per 1000 person-years, compared with 1 per 1000 person-years among those without dysplasia. [ 
       Epidemiology 
         United States statistics Esophageal cancer is the seventh most common cause of cancer death in males. [ [ The American Cancer Society estimates that 17,990 new cases of esophageal cancer (14,440 in men and 3,550 in women) will occur in the United States in 2013; 15,210 persons (12,220 men and 2,990 women) are expected to die of the disease.  The incidence rate of adenocarcinoma of the esophagus in the United States showed an average annual increase of 1.7% in men and 1.9% in women from 1999 to 2008. [ The epidemiology of esophageal carcinoma has changed markedly over the past several decades in the United States. [ Over the last 4 decades, the incidence of adenocarcinoma of the distal esophagus and gastroesophageal junction has increased progressively. Currently, it accounts for more than 70% of all the new cases of esophageal cancer.  
         International statistics Esophageal cancer is the seventh leading cause of cancer death worldwide. In some regions, such as areas of northern Iran, some areas of southern Russia, and northern China, the incidence of esophageal carcinoma may be as high as 800 cases per 100,000 population. Unlike in the United States, squamous cell carcinoma is responsible for 95% of all esophageal cancers worldwide.  
         Sex- and age-related demographics Esophageal cancer is generally more common in men than in women. The male-to-female ratio is 3-4:1. Esophageal cancer occurs most commonly during the sixth and seventh decades of life. The disease becomes more common with advancing age; it is about 20 times more common in persons older than 65 years than it is in individuals below that age.  
       Prognosis 
         Survival in patients with esophageal cancer depends on the stage of the disease. Squamous cell carcinoma and adenocarcinoma, stage-by-stage, appear to have equivalent survival rates. Lymph node or solid organ metastases are associated with low survival rates. In 2001-2007, the overall 5-year survival rate for esophageal cancer was 19%. [ 
           Five-year survival for esophageal cancer based on TNM stage.  Five-year survival for esophageal cancer based on TNM stage.  A report of 1085 patients who underwent transhiatal esophagectomy for cancer showed that the operation was associated with a 4% operative mortality rate and a 23% 5-year survival rate. A better 5-year survival rate (48%) was identified in a subgroup of patients who had a complete response (ie, disappearance of the tumor) following preoperative radiation and chemotherapy (ie, neoadjuvant therapy). [ Transhiatal and transthoracic esophagectomies have equivalent long-term survival rates. [ 
         Imaging and prognosis Suzuki et al found that a higher initial standardized uptake value on positron emission tomography (PET) scanning is associated with poorer overall survival among patients with esophageal or gastroesophageal carcinoma receiving chemoradiation. The authors suggested that PET scanning may become useful for individualizing therapy. [ A study by Gillies et al also found that PET-computed tomography (CT) scanning can be used to predict survival; in this study, the presence of fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-avid lymph nodes was an independent adverse prognostic factor. [ 
         HER-2 and prognosis A study by Prins et al of human epidermal growth factor 2 (HER-2) protein overexpression and  HER-2 [ 
     Clinical Presentation 
       History and Physical Examination 
         History Dysphagia, the most common presenting symptom of esophageal cancer, is initially experienced for solids but eventually progresses to include liquids. A complaint of dysphagia in an adult should always prompt an endoscopy to help rule out the presence of esophageal cancer. A barium swallow study is also indicated in these cases.  Other symptoms include the following: 
           
             Weight loss - This is the second most common symptom and occurs in more than 50% of people with esophageal carcinoma 
             Bleeding - Patients may experience bleeding from the tumor 
             Pain - Pain may be felt in the epigastric or retrosternal area; pain over bony structures indicates metastatic disease 
             Hoarseness - This is caused by invasion of the recurrent laryngeal nerve; it is a sign that the cancer has progressed beyond the point at which surgical resection remains possible  
             Persistent cough 
             Respiratory symptoms - These can be caused by aspiration of undigested food or by direct invasion of the tracheobronchial tree by the tumor; the latter is also a sign of unresectability  
         Physical examination Physical examination findings in patients with esophageal cancer are typically normal, unless the cancer has metastasized to neck nodes or the liver. Lymphadenopathy in the laterocervical or supraclavicular area or the presence of hepatomegaly often indicates unresectable disease.  
     Workup 
       Approach Considerations 
         The goals of the workup are to establish the diagnosis and to stage the cancer. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy allows direct visualization and biopsies of the tumor. (See the image below.) 
           Endoscopy demonstrating intraluminal esophageal cancer.  Endoscopy demonstrating intraluminal esophageal cancer.  Laboratory studies in patients with esophageal cancer focus principally on patient factors that may affect treatment. Nutritional status should be evaluated in patients with dysphagia; liver function studies should be performed in alcoholic patients. In 2013, the Society of Thoracic Surgeons released clinical practice guidelines to assist in the diagnosis and treatment of localized esophageal cancer. Their recommendations include the following [ 
           
             For the diagnosis of esophageal cancer, flexible endoscopy with biopsy is the primary method 
             For early-stage esophageal cancer, CT of the chest and abdomen is an optional test for staging; for locoregionalized esophageal cancer, CT of the chest and abdomen is a recommended test for staging  
             For early-stage esophageal cancer, PET is an optional test for staging. For locoregionalized esophageal cancer, PET is a recommended test for staging  
             In patients without metastatic disease, endoscopic ultrasonography is recommended to improve the accuracy of staging 
             In patients with small, discrete nodules or areas of dysplasia in whom disease appears limited to the mucosa or submucosa as assessed by endoscopic ultrasonography, endoscopic mucosal resection should be considered as a diagnostic/staging tool  
             In patients with locally advanced (T3/T4) adenocarcinoma of the esophagogastric junction infiltrating the anatomic cardia or Siewart type III esophagogastric tumors, laparoscopy is recommended to improve accuracy of staging  
       Imaging Studies 
         Ultrasonography Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) is the most sensitive test for determining the depth of tumor penetration (T staging) and the presence of enlarged periesophageal lymph nodes (N staging). [ 
         CT scanning Abdominal and chest computed tomography (CT) scans are useful for helping to exclude the presence of metastases (M staging) to the lungs and liver and may be useful for helping to determine whether adjacent structures have been invaded. [ 
           Chest CT scan showing invasion of the trachea by esophageal cancer.  Chest CT scan showing invasion of the trachea by esophageal cancer.  
         PET scanning Positron emission tomography (PET) scanning is also a useful baseline imaging technique (see the image below) and is increasingly becoming standard in the staging of esophageal cancer. It may be particularly useful in detecting occult distant lymph node metastases and bone spread. In addition, the intensity of radiopharmaceutical uptake on PET scans may reflect the biology of the cancer and thus may have prognostic significance. [ 
         Bronchoscopy Bronchoscopy is indicated for cancers of the middle and upper third of the thoracic esophagus to help exclude invasion of the trachea or bronchi. Laparoscopy and thoracoscopy have a greater than 92% accuracy in staging regional nodes.  
         Barium swallow Barium swallow is very sensitive for detecting strictures (see the first image below) and intraluminal masses (see the second image below) but does not allow staging and biopsy. It is now rarely used, but it may be helpful for studying the distal anatomy in obstructive tumors that are inaccessible by endoscopy. 
           Barium swallow demonstrating stricture due to cancer.  Barium swallow demonstrating stricture due to cancer.  
           Barium swallow demonstrating an endoluminal mass in the mid esophagus.  Barium swallow demonstrating an endoluminal mass in the mid esophagus.  For more information, see the Medscape Reference article  Esophageal Carcinoma Imaging 
       Staging 
         Esophageal cancer staging follows the tumor-node-metastasis (TNM) classification of the American Joint Cancer Committee/Union for International Cancer Control/ (AJCC/UICC). The classification and staging scheme was changed in the 7th edition of the AJCC/UICC manual, published in 2010. [ No completely satisfactory method is available to clinically stage esophageal cancer. The difficulty of clinically assessing the disease is reflected by changes over time in the AJCC staging system. The 1983 system was based on the length of the intraluminal esophageal tumor, the presence of esophageal obstruction, and the involvement of palpable lymph nodes. This clinical staging system proved to be limited. The 1988 revision defined a clinical and pathologic staging system based entirely on the depth of esophageal wall invasion and the presence or absence of local nodal involvement. Neither of these parameters is assessed easily on a clinical basis. Hofstetter et al therefore proposed incorporating the number of involved lymph nodes with regional and nonregional node location. [ The 2010 TNM classification for esophageal cancer is as follows (staging is detailed in Table 1, below): 
           
             Tis - Carcinoma in situ/high-grade dysplasia 
             T1 - Lamina propria or submucosa 
             T1a - Lamina propria or muscularis mucosae 
             T1b - Submucosa 
             T2 - Muscularis propria 
             T3 - Adventitia 
             T4 - Adjacent structures 
             T4a - Pleura, pericardium, diaphragm, or adjacent peritoneum 
             T4b - Other adjacent structures (eg, aorta, vertebral body, trachea) 
             N0 - No regional lymph node metastasis 
             N1 - 1-2 regional lymph nodes (N1 is site dependent) 
             N2 - 3-6 regional lymph nodes 
             N3 - More than 6 regional lymph nodes 
             M0 - No distant metastasis 
             M1 - Distant metastasis (M1a and M1b are site dependent) 
           Table 1. Staging Classification. 
             
               
                 Stage IA 
                 T1 
                 N0 
                 M0 
               
                 Stage IB 
                 T2 
                 N0 
                 M0 
               
                 Stage IIA 
                 T3 
                 N0 
                 M0 
               
                 Stage IIB 
                 T1,T2 
                 N1 
                 M0 
               
                 Stage IIIA 
                 T4a 
                 N0 
                 M0 
               
                   
                 T3 
                 N1 
                 M0 
               
                   
                 T1,T2 
                 N2 
                 M0 
               
                 Stage IIIB 
                 T3 
                 N2 
                 M0 
               
                 Stage IIIC 
                 T4a 
                 N1,N2 
                 M0 
               
                   
                 T4b 
                 Any N 
                 M0 
               
                   
                 Any T 
                 N3 
                 M0 
               
                 Stage IV 
                 Any T 
                 Any N 
                 M1   All esophageal tumors, as well as tumors with epicenters within 5 cm of the esophagogastric junction that also extend into the esophagus, are classified and staged according to the AJCC/UICC esophageal scheme. Tumors with an epicenter in the stomach that are more than 5 cm from the esophagogastric junction or those within 5 cm of the esophagogastric junction without extension into the esophagus are staged using the gastric carcinoma scheme.  Other classifications—such as that of the Japanese Society for Esophageal Diseases, which is widely used in Asia—differ from that of the AJCC/UICC, especially regarding lymph node distribution and nomenclature. [ 
     Treatment & Management 
       Approach Considerations 
         Treatment of esophageal cancer varies by disease stage. [ In patients with T1b and any N, surgery may be the initial treatment; however, patients with stages beyond T1b should undergo multidisciplinary evaluation and be considered for multimodality therapy.  Trimodality (chemoradiation followed by surgery) is the recommended treatment for patients who can tolerate this regimen; this option is supported by strong level 1 evidence. [ [ Preoperative chemotherapy followed by surgery is another option. However, the evidence for this approach is weak; the chance of increase in 2-year overall survival is less than 6%, compared with approximately 13% with trimodality therapy.  Stage IV disease is treated with chemotherapy or symptomatic and supportive care, as indicated. For patients who, because of their clinical condition or owing to advanced disease, are not candidates for curative treatment, the goal of therapy is palliation of dysphagia, so that these patients can eat. No single method of palliation is best for every situation. Most patients require more than 1 kind of palliative treatment to sustain esophageal patency during the course of their disease.  
       Surgical Indications and Contraindications 
         Surgery remains the cornerstone of treatment for esophageal cancer. Indications for surgery include the following: 
           
             Esophageal cancer in a patient who is a candidate for surgery 
             High-grade dysplasia in a patient with Barrett esophagus that cannot be adequately treated endoscopically [ Contraindications to surgery include the following: 
           
             Metastasis to N2 nodes (ie, cervical or supraclavicular lymph nodes) or solid organs (eg, liver, lungs); the treatment of patients with celiac lymph node involvement remains controversial [ 
             Invasion of adjacent structures (eg, the recurrent laryngeal nerve, tracheobronchial tree, aorta, pericardium) In addition, the presence of severe, associated comorbid conditions (eg, cardiovascular disease, respiratory disease) can decrease a patient's chances of surviving an esophageal resection. Consequently, cardiac and respiratory function must be carefully evaluated preoperatively. A forced expiratory volume in 1 second of less than 1.2 L and a left ventricular ejection fraction of less than 0.4 are relative contraindications to the operation.  
       Esophagectomy 
         Esophageal resection (esophagectomy) remains a critical component of multimodality therapy for patients with tumors of any stage. Endoscopic mucosal resection is an experimental approach to patients with T1a disease or high-grade dysplasia that is limited to certain centers and performed only under protocol. Esophagectomy is no longer is used for palliation of symptoms because other treatment modalities have become available for relieving dysphagia.  An esophagectomy can be performed by using an abdominal and a cervical incision with blunt mediastinal dissection through the esophageal hiatus (ie, transhiatal esophagectomy [THE]) or by using an abdominal and a right thoracic incision (ie, transthoracic esophagectomy [TTE]).  THE offers the advantage of avoiding a chest incision, which can cause prolonged discomfort and can further aggravate the condition of patients with compromised respiratory function. After removal of the esophagus, continuity of the gastrointestinal tract is usually reestablished using the stomach.  Some authors have questioned the validity of THE as a cancer operation because part of the operation is not performed under direct vision and fewer lymph nodes are removed than with TTE. However, many retrospective studies and 2 prospective ones have shown no difference in survival between the operations, suggesting that the factor influencing survival is not the type of operation but, rather, the stage of the cancer at the time the operation is performed. [ 
         Morbidity and mortality Complications from esophagectomy occur in approximately 40% of patients. The morbidity associated with the surgery consists mostly of respiratory, cardiac, and septic complications, including the following:  
           
             Respiratory complications (15-20%) - Include atelectasis, pleural effusion, and pneumonia 
             Cardiac complications (15-20%) - Include cardiac arrhythmias and myocardial infarction 
             Septic complications (10%) - Include wound infection, anastomotic leak (breakdown of the new connection between the stomach and esophagus), and pneumonia  Anastomotic leaks and stricture may require dilatation (20%). Leaks may be treated with endoscopic placement of self-expanding, removable plastic stents. [ Leak rates vary depending on whether the anastomosis was performed in the chest (3-12%) or the neck (10-25%). [ A retrospective review of 1223 esophagectomies for cancer found that surgical management of intrathoracic leaks did not increase the patient mortality rate or effect long-term survival. [ As with other complex operations (eg, cardiac operations, resection of the pancreas or liver), the lowest mortality rate with esophagectomy is achieved when the procedure is performed in high-volume centers by high-volume surgeons. In California from 1990-1994, for instance, 5 high-volume centers had a mortality rate of 5% or less for esophageal resection for cancer, while the state’s average mortality rate for this surgery was approximately 18%. [ The better results in high-volume centers are due to a team approach. In these facilities, expert surgeons work with intensivists, cardiologists, pulmonologists, radiologists, and nurses who have experience and expertise.  
         Transthoracic esophagectomy For TTE, the patient is placed supine on the operating room table. An arterial line, a central venous catheter, a Foley catheter, and a dual-lumen endotracheal tube are placed. Preoperative antibiotics are administered. An upper midline incision is made.  After exploring the peritoneal cavity for metastatic disease (if metastases are found, the operation is not continued), the stomach is mobilized. The right gastric and the right gastroepiploic arteries are preserved, while the short gastric vessels and the left gastric artery are divided.  Next, the gastroesophageal junction is mobilized, and the esophageal hiatus is enlarged. A pyloromyotomy is performed, and a feeding jejunostomy is placed for postoperative nutritional support.  After closure of the abdominal incision, the patient is repositioned in the left lateral decubitus position and a right posterolateral thoracotomy is performed in the fifth intercostal space.  The azygos vein is divided to allow full mobilization of the esophagus. The stomach is delivered into the chest through the hiatus and is then divided approximately 5 cm below the gastroesophageal junction.  An anastomosis (hand-sewn or stapled) is performed between the esophagus and the stomach at the apex of the right chest cavity. Then, the chest incision is closed.  
         Transhiatal esophagectomy For THE, the preoperative details are similar to those of TTE, except that a single-lumen, rather than a double-lumen, endotracheal tube is used. The neck is prepared in the operative field.  The abdominal part of the operation is identical to the TTE; however, dissection of the esophagus is performed through the enlarged esophageal hiatus without opening the right chest. The esophagus is mobilized in this fashion all the way to the thoracic inlet.  Then, a 6-cm incision is made in the left side of the neck. The internal jugular vein and carotid artery are retracted laterally, and the esophagus is identified and isolated posterior to the airway. To prevent injury to the left recurrent laryngeal nerve, no mechanical retractors are used to retract the trachea.  Next, after resection of the proximal stomach and thoracic esophagus, the remaining stomach is pulled up through the posterior mediastinum until it reaches the remaining esophagus at the cervical level. Then, a hand-sewn anastomosis is performed, and a small drain is placed in the neck alongside the anastomosis. The abdominal and neck incisions are closed. (See the image below.) 
           Transhiatal esophagectomy in which (a) is the abdominal incision, (b) is the cervical incision,... Transhiatal esophagectomy in which (a) is the abdominal incision, (b) is the cervical incision, and (c) is the stomach stretching from abdomen to the neck.  
         Minimally invasive surgery techniques in esophagectomy The use of laparoscopic and thoracoscopic techniques has revolutionized the treatment of benign esophageal disorders such as achalasia and gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). Advantages of minimally invasive surgery include a shorter hospital stay, less postoperative discomfort, and much faster recovery time than with open surgery. These techniques are finding a place in the treatment of esophageal cancer. [ Video-assisted thoracoscopy (VATS) is being used in many centers for the thoracic mobilization of the esophagus, reducing the size of the chest incision. In addition, laparoscopy can be used to mobilize the gastric conduit in the abdomen, reducing abdominal incision size as well.  A study by Uenosono et al found that sentinel node mapping can be applied to patients with clinical T1 and N0 esophageal cancer. Use of this technique may facilitate less invasive surgery, with reduction of lymphadenectomy. [ Endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR) is a modern, attractive option for the treatment of superficial esophageal cancers. High-grade dysplasia and mucosa-limited neoplasms are candidates for EMR, because of the low risk of node metastasis in these cases. A population-based study of 1618 patients with grade Tis, T1a, or T1b esophageal cancer found that overall survival times and esophageal-cancer-specific survival times with endoscopic therapy were similar to those with surgery, after adjustment for patient and tumor factors. [ 
         Salvage endoscopic resection In patients with local failure after definitive chemoradiotherapy (CRT) for esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC), salvage endoscopic treatment (SET) may be a viable option, according to a study reported at the 2014 Gastrointestinal Cancers Symposium. [ Curative resection was achieved in 88% of the patients who underwent endoscopic resection, and a complete response was achieved in 57.5% of those who underwent photodynamic therapy. [ [ 
       Chemoradiotherapy 
         Chemotherapy and radiotherapy for esophageal cancer are delivered preoperatively. No survival benefit is obtained when radiation and chemotherapy are administered postoperatively; however, postoperative continuance of chemotherapy started preoperatively may be beneficial. [ Most chemotherapy that is currently used for the treatment of esophageal cancer, including alkylating, antimetabolite, anthracycline, and antimicrotubular agents, are not approved for this indication by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Chemotherapy for squamous cell esophageal carcinoma, as with squamous cell carcinomas in general, is based on cisplatin, while chemotherapy for esophageal adenocarcinoma has been extrapolated from experience in patients with adenocarcinoma of the stomach.  Neoadjuvant chemotherapy alone appears to offer a limited benefit at best. A North American randomized trial found that preoperative chemotherapy with a combination of cisplatin and fluorouracil did not improve overall survival among patients with squamous cell cancer or adenocarcinoma of the esophagus. In a larger trial, British investigators found that preoperative chemotherapy with those 2 agents resulted in a 5-year survival rate of 23.0%, compared with 17.1% for surgery alone. [ In contrast, the Chemoradiotherapy for Oesophageal Cancer Followed by Surgery Study (CROSS) demonstrated considerable benefit from preoperative chemoradiation over surgery alone in selected patients with esophageal or esophagogastric-junction cancer (tumor stage T1N1 or T2–T3 with any N). [ An analysis of data from CROSS I and II showed that preoperative chemoradiotherapy (CRT) plus surgery was superior to surgery alone in preventing local, regional, and distant recurrence, particularly hematogenous metastasis and peritoneal carcinomatosis. [ Neoadjuvant therapy consists of a combination of radiotherapy (approximately 45 Gy) and chemotherapy with cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil. While the radiotherapy acts locally at the tumor site, the chemotherapy acts on tumor cells that have already spread. This combination therapy is usually administered over a 45-day period; esophageal resection is performed after an interval of approximately 4 weeks.  Rohatgi et al reported that the response to preoperative chemoradiotherapy correlated strongly with overall survival and disease-free survival in patients with esophageal cancer. In their review of 235 cases, survival decreased progressively between patients who achieved a pathologic complete response, those who had a partial response (1-50% residual carcinoma in the resected specimen), and those with no response (greater than 50% residual carcinoma). [ A study by Rao et al identified groups of esophageal tumors with distinct gene expression profiles, which in future may allow for tailored treatment protocols. [ [ A trial involving 111 patients undergoing chemoradiotherapy for head-and-neck or esophageal cancer indicated that enteral nutrition enriched with n-3 fatty acids helps to preserve body mass and improve nutritional and functional status parameters during chemoradiotherapy. [ 
       Palliative Care 
         In patients who, because of their clinical condition or advanced disease, are not candidates for surgery, treatment focuses on control of dysphagia. The most appropriate method to control dysphagia should be determined for each patient individually, depending on tumor characteristics, patient preference, and the specific expertise of the physician.  The following treatment modalities are available to help achieve this goal: 
           
             Chemotherapy 
             Radiotherapy 
             Laser therapy 
             Stents [ 
         Chemotherapy Chemotherapy as a single modality has limited use. Only a few patients achieve a modest and short-lived response. A phase 3 study from the United Kingdom suggests that docetaxel may be useful as a second-line treatment for patients with esophageal cancer who have progressed after first-line chemotherapy. [ Because survival in these patients is measured in months, quality of life is an important consideration. In the UK study, quality-of-life questionnaires demonstrated no differences between the 2 groups on global and functioning scores but did indicate an improvement in symptom scores, with the docetaxel group reporting less pain. [ In 2006, a Cochrane review tried to assess the effectiveness of chemotherapy versus best supportive care, as well as that of different chemotherapy regimens against each other, in metastatic esophageal carcinoma. The authors found that no consistent benefit with any specific chemotherapy regimen. [ 
         Radiotherapy Radiation therapy is successful in relieving dysphagia in approximately 50% of patients. In patients with advanced esophageal cancer, the preoperative combination of chemotherapy and radiotherapy has shown good results. In a large, multicenter study, Herskovic and colleagues reported a 2-year survival rate of 38%, with a median survival period of 12.5 months, for patients treated with radiotherapy in combination with chemotherapy (fluorouracil and cisplatin), compared with a 2-year-survival rate of 10% and a median survival period of 8.5 months in patients treated with radiotherapy alone. [ In a study, Folkert et al found that high-dose-rate (HDR) endoluminal brachytherapy was well tolerated in medically inoperable patients with superficial primary or recurrent esophageal cancer. Over the course of 3 years, 14 patients were treated with HDR intraluminal brachytherapy; 10 had recurrent esophageal cancer and 4 had previously unirradiated lesions. The overall freedom from failure (OFFF) and the overall survival (OS) rate at 18 months were 30.8% and 72.7%, respectively. Patients with recurrent disease had an 11.1% OFFF and a 55.6% OS rate at 18 months. For patients with previously unirradiated disease, the OFFF was 75% and the OS rate was 100%. [ 
         Laser therapy Laser therapy (Nd:YAG laser) can help to achieve temporary relief of dysphagia in as many as 70% of patients. Multiple sessions are usually required to keep the esophageal lumen patent. The photosensitizer porfimer (Photofrin) is FDA approved for palliation of patients with completely obstructing esophageal cancer or partially obstructing cancer that cannot be satisfactorily treated with Nd:YAG laser therapy. Intravenous injection of porfimer is followed 40–50 hours later with delivery of 630 nm wavelength laser light; a second laser light treatment may be given 96–120 hours after the injection.  
         Stents Patients may be intubated with expandable metallic stents, which can be deployed by endoscopy under fluoroscopic guidance and can keep the esophageal lumen patent. Stents are particularly useful for patients with a tracheoesophageal fistula. 
       Postoperative Care and Follow-up 
         The average length of postoperative hospital stay for patients with esophageal cancer is 9-14 days. Patients usually spend the first postoperative night in the intensive care unit (ICU).  Patients can be extubated immediately after the operation, but mechanical ventilation should be continued if any concerns about the respiratory status are present. Respiratory complications (eg, atelectasis, pleural effusion, pneumonia) and cardiac complications (eg, cardiac arrhythmias) usually occur in the first postoperative days. Patients leave the ICU and are transferred to the surgical ward only when their respiratory status and cardiac status are satisfactory.  Feeding through the feeding jejunostomy begins on postoperative day 1. On postoperative day 6, a swallow study is performed to check for anastomotic leakage. If no leak is present, patients start oral feedings. If a leak is present, the drainage tubes are left in place and nutrition is provided entirely through the feeding jejunostomy until the leak closes spontaneously.  Approximately 85-90% of patients go home after discharge. The remaining patients may need additional time in a skilled nursing facility if they live alone and if they cannot take care of themselves.  Patients are seen by the responsible surgeon at 2 weeks and 4 weeks after discharge from the hospital and subsequently every 6 months by an oncologist. Most patients return to their regular level of activities within 2 months.  
       Prevention of Esophageal Cancer 
         For squamous cell carcinoma, prevention consists of smoking cessation, efforts to reduce alcohol abuse, and consumption of a diet containing an adequate amount of fruits, vegetables, and vitamins. For esophageal adenocarcinomas, prevention involves stopping the sequence of events leading from gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) to Barrett esophagus to adenocarcinoma.  Better control of gastroesophageal reflux can prevent the development of Barrett metaplasia in patients with GERD and can discourage the development of high-grade dysplasia in patients with metaplasia. Endoscopic follow-up evaluations should be performed at 1- to 2-year intervals to detect the presence of dysplasia, allowing intervention before cancer develops.  Dysplasia in Barrett esophagus can be treated with endoscopic ablation, using radiofrequency ablation (RFA), photodynamic therapy (PDT), or cryotherapy.  If high-grade dysplasia does develop, esophagectomy is indicated. The operation must be performed by experienced surgeons in high-volume centers in order to keep the mortality rate at less than 5%.  
         Radiofrequency ablation RFA has been gaining popularity as a treatment for Barrett esophagus with dysplasia. Shaheen et al reported complete eradication of all dysplasia 2 years after RFA in 101 of 106 patients (95%). After 3 years, dysplasia remained eradicated in more than 85% of patients, without maintenance RFA. The rate of serious adverse events was 3.4%, and the rate of esophageal stricture was 7.6%. [ 
         Photodynamic therapy PDT involves the administration of photosensitizing chromophores, which are selectively retained by dysplastic malignant tissue. Light is then delivered in the area. The photosensitizer absorbs photons, becomes photoexcited, and transfers its energy to a chemical substrate that causes biologic damage to the abnormal tissue. A drawback of PDT is the formation of esophageal strictures in 34% of patients. The photosensitizer porfimer is FDA approved for ablation of high-grade dysplasia in Barrett esophagus.  
     Medication 
       Medication Summary Chemotherapy of squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus, like squamous cell malignancies in general, is based on cisplatin. The chemotherapeutic choices in esophageal adenocarcinoma have been extrapolated from chemotherapy experience in patients with adenocarcinoma of the stomach. Most of the chemotherapy regimens currently used for the treatment of esophageal cancer, including alkylating, antimetabolite, anthracycline, and antimicrotubular agents, have not been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA).  
       Antineoplastics, Antimetabolite 
         Class Summary These agents inhibit cell growth and proliferation. They interfere with DNA synthesis by blocking the methylation of deoxyuridylic acid.  
         Fluorouracil (Adrucil) Fluorouracil is a pyrimidine antimetabolite. Several mechanisms of action have been proposed, including inhibition of thymidylate synthase and inhibition of RNA synthesis. This agent is also a potent radiosensitizer. 
         Capecitabine (Xeloda) Capecitabine is a pyrimidine antimetabolite and a prodrug of fluorouracil. It forms the active moiety, fluorouracil, by undergoing hydrolysis in the liver and tissues. Capecitabine is used for the treatment of esophageal cancer, which is an off-label indication.  
       Antineoplastics, Alkylating 
         Class Summary These agents inhibit cell growth and proliferation, interfering with DNA synthesis by the formation of DNA cross-links. Alkylating agents can have serious adverse effects such as bone marrow suppression, anaphylactic-like reactions, ototoxicity, renal toxicity, and vomiting.  
         Cisplatin Intrastrand cross-linking of DNA and inhibition of DNA precursors are among the proposed mechanisms of action for cisplatin. This agent is used in combination with radiation therapy. Cisplatin has black box warnings for adverse reactions, including anaphylactic-like reactions, ototoxicity, and renal toxicity. 
         Carboplatin Carboplatin is a platinum alkylating agent that interferes with the function of DNA by producing interstrand DNA cross-links. It can be used in combination with paclitaxel for the treatment of esophageal cancer, which is an off-label indication. Carboplatin has black box warnings including bone marrow suppression, anaphylactic reactions, and vomiting.  
         Oxaliplatin (Eloxatin) Oxaliplatin is a platinum alkylating agent that inhibits DNA replication and transcription, resulting in cell death. It can be used in combination chemotherapy for the treatment of esophageal cancer, which is an off-label indication. It has a black box warning for anaphylactic reactions, which can be managed with epinephrine, corticosteroids, and antihistamines.  
       Antineoplastics, Antimicrotubular 
         Class Summary These agents prevent cell growth and proliferation. They work by enhancing tubulin dimers, stabilizing existing microtubules, and inhibiting microtubule disassembly.  
         Docetaxel (Taxotere, Docefrez) Docetaxel inhibits the depolymerization of tubulin, which inhibits DNA, RNA, and protein synthesis. It can be used in combination with cisplatin and fluorouracil for the treatment of esophageal cancer, which is an off-label indication. It has several black box warnings such as bone marrow suppression, fluid retention, and hypersensitivity reactions. Use of docetaxel is not recommended in certain patients with hepatic impairment. Patients receiving treatment with docetaxel should be premedicated with corticosteroids the day before administration to help reduce fluid retention and hypersensitivity reactions.  
         Paclitaxel Paclitaxel promotes microtubule assembly, interferes with the G2 mitotic phase, and inhibits cell replication. Although not FDA approved, it has been used in combination chemotherapy for the treatment of esophageal cancer. Paclitaxel has an off-label indication for the treatment of adenocarcinoma. Black box warnings for this drug include bone marrow suppression and hypersensitivity reactions.  
       Antineoplastics, Anthracycline 
         Class Summary Anthracycline antineoplastics inhibit DNA and RNA synthesis by steric obstruction. They intercalate between DNA base pairs and trigger DNA cleavage by topoisomerase II.  
         Epirubicin (Ellence) Epirubicin inhibits DNA and RNA synthesis. It can be used off label as part of a combination chemotherapy regimen for the treatment of esophageal cancer. It has several black box warnings, including bone marrow suppression, extravasation, myocardial toxicity, and secondary malignancy. Dosage reduction is recommended in patients with mild to moderate hepatic impairment. 
       Antineoplastics, Topoisomerase Inhibitors 
         Class Summary These agents prevent cell growth and proliferation. They work by binding to topoisomerase and causing single-strand DNA breaks. 
         Irinotecan (Camptosar) Irinotecan binds reversibly to the topoisomerase I–DNA complex and prevents the ligation of the cleaved DNA strand. It can be used as part of combination chemotherapy for the treatment of esophageal cancer, which is an off-label indication. Black box warnings for irinotecan include bone marrow suppression and diarrhea. 
       Antineoplastics, Other 
         Class Summary This category includes miscellaneous antineoplastic agents that cause cytotoxic activity by various mechanisms of action. 
         Porfimer (Photofrin) Porfimer is a photodynamic therapy that causes cytotoxic activity by producing oxygen free-radicals in the presence of laser light. It also can release thromboxane A2, leading to necrosis and vascular occlusion. It is indicated for palliation in patients with partially or completely obstructing esophageal cancer. 
     start media 
       
         Endoscopy demonstrating intraluminal esophageal cancer.  Endoscopy demonstrating intraluminal esophageal cancer.  
       
         Cascade of events that lead from gastroesophageal reflux disease to adenocarcinoma.  Cascade of events that lead from gastroesophageal reflux disease to adenocarcinoma.  
       
         Barium swallow demonstrating stricture due to cancer.  Barium swallow demonstrating stricture due to cancer.  
       
         Barium swallow demonstrating an endoluminal mass in the mid esophagus.  Barium swallow demonstrating an endoluminal mass in the mid esophagus.  
       
         Chest CT scan showing invasion of the trachea by esophageal cancer.  Chest CT scan showing invasion of the trachea by esophageal cancer.  
       
         Transhiatal esophagectomy in which (a) is the abdominal incision, (b) is the cervical incision,... Transhiatal esophagectomy in which (a) is the abdominal incision, (b) is the cervical incision, and (c) is the stomach stretching from abdomen to the neck.  
       
         Five-year survival for esophageal cancer based on TNM stage.  Five-year survival for esophageal cancer based on TNM stage.  
       
         H and E, high power, showing junction of benign glands in the lower right, Barrett's columnar... H and E, high power, showing junction of benign glands in the lower right, Barrett's columnar cell metaplasia with a large goblet cell containing blue mucin in the lower center and adenocarcinoma on the left.  
       
         Macroscopic image of a resection of the gastroesophageal junction. On the right is non-... Macroscopic image of a resection of the gastroesophageal junction. On the right is non-neoplastic esophagus, consisting of tan, smooth mucosa. On the left is the non-neoplastic rugal folds of the stomach. In the center of the picture is an ulcer with a yellow-green fibrinous exudate surrounded by irregular, heaped-up margins with almost a cobblestone appearance. The latter represents mucosal adenocarcinoma with probably some Barrett's metaplasia in the background.  
       
         H and E, high power, demonstrating invasive esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. This carcinoma... H and E, high power, demonstrating invasive esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. This carcinoma does not form glands and instead shows features of squamous differentiation, including keratinization and intercellular bridges.  
       
         Macroscopic image of an esophageal resection. A polypoid squamous cell carcinoma is visible... Macroscopic image of an esophageal resection. A polypoid squamous cell carcinoma is visible protruding from the esophageal mucosal surface (left center of specimen).  
       
         On this positron emission computed tomography (PET) scan, esophageal cancer is evident as a... On this positron emission computed tomography (PET) scan, esophageal cancer is evident as a golden lesion in the chest.  
     
       Author 
         Keith M Baldwin, DO IMPH, Assistant Professor of Surgery, Boston University School of Medicine; Endocrine and Surgical Oncologist, Department of General Surgery, Roger Williams Cancer Center Keith M Baldwin, DO is a member of the following medical societies:  American College of Surgeons Society of Surgical Oncology American Association of Endocrine Surgeons Americas Hepato-Pancreato-Biliary Association Society of International Humanitarian Surgeons/Surgeons OverSeas (SOS) Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Coauthor(s) 
         Marco G Patti, MD Professor of Surgery, Director, Center for Esophageal Diseases, University of Chicago Pritzker School of Medicine Marco G Patti, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American Association for the Advancement of Science American Surgical Association American College of Surgeons American Gastroenterological Association American Medical Association Association for Academic Surgery Society for Surgery of the Alimentary Tract Society of American Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic Surgeons Southwestern Surgical Congress Western Surgical Association Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
         N Joseph Espat, MD, MS, FACS Harold J Wanebo Professor and Chief of Surgical Oncology, Director, Adele R Decof Cancer Center, Vice-Chair of Department of Surgery, Roger Williams Medical Center, Boston University School of Medicine N Joseph Espat, MD, MS, FACS is a member of the following medical societies:  Alpha Omega Alpha American Association for Cancer Research American College of Surgeons American Medical Association American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition Association for Academic Surgery Central Surgical Association Chicago Medical Society International Hepato-Pancreato-Biliary Association Sigma Xi Society for Surgery of the Alimentary Tract Society of American Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic Surgeons Society of Surgical Oncology Society of University Surgeons Southeastern Surgical Congress Southern Medical Association Americas Hepato-Pancreato-Biliary Association American Society of Clinical Oncology Surgical Infection Society Society for Leukocyte Biology Pancreas Club Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
         Fernando AM Herbella, MD, PhD TCBC, Affiliate Professor, Attending Surgeon in Gastrointestinal Surgery, Esophagus and Stomach Division, Department of Surgery, Federal University of Sao Paulo, Brazil; Private Practice; Medical Examiner, Sao Paulo's Medical Examiner's Office Headquarters, Brazil Fernando AM Herbella, MD, PhD is a member of the following medical societies:  Society for Surgery of the Alimentary Tract Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Chief Editor 
         Jules E Harris, MD, FACP, FRCPC Clinical Professor of Medicine, Section of Hematology/Oncology, University of Arizona College of Medicine, Arizona Cancer Center Jules E Harris, MD, FACP, FRCPC is a member of the following medical societies:  American Association for the Advancement of Science American Society of Hematology Central Society for Clinical and Translational Research American Society of Clinical Oncology Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
     Acknowledgements 
       Philip Schulman, MD Philip Schulman, MD, is a member of the following medical societies:  American Association for Cancer Research American College of Physicians American Society of Hematology Medical Society of the State of New York Disclosure: Nothing to disclose.  Francisco Talavera, PharmD, PhD Disclosure: Medscape Salary Employment  
     
       Edwards MJ, Gable DR, Lentsch AB, et al. The rationale for esophagectomy as the optimal therapy for Barrett's esophagus with high-grade dysplasia.  Ann Surg [Medline] 
       Ferguson MK, Durkin A. Long-term survival after esophagectomy for Barrett's adenocarcinoma in endoscopically surveyed and nonsurveyed patients.  J Gastrointest Surg [Medline] 
       Torek F. The first successful resection of the thoracic portion of the esophagus for carcinoma.  Surg Gynecol Obstet 
       Ohsawa T. Surgery of the esophagus.  Arch Jpn Chir 
       Marshall SF. Carcinoma of the esophagus: successful resection of lower end of esophagus with reestablishment of esophageal gastric continuity.  Surg Clin North Amer 
       Tilanus HW. Changing patterns in the treatment of carcinoma of the esophagus.  Scand J Gastroenterol Suppl [Medline] 
       Jankowski JA, Wright NA, Meltzer SJ, et al. Molecular evolution of the metaplasia-dysplasia-adenocarcinoma sequence in the esophagus.  Am J Pathol [Medline] 
       Koppert LB, Wijnhoven BP, van Dekken H, et al. The molecular biology of esophageal adenocarcinoma.  J Surg Oncol [Medline] 
       Casson AG, Manolopoulos B, Troster M, et al. Clinical implications of p53 gene mutation in the progression of Barrett's epithelium to invasive esophageal cancer.  Am J Surg [Medline] 
       Lagergren J, Bergstrom R, Lindgren A, et al. Symptomatic gastroesophageal reflux as a risk factor for esophageal adenocarcinoma.  N Engl J Med [Medline] 
       Wu C, Hu Z, He Z, et al. Genome-wide association study identifies three new susceptibility loci for esophageal squamous-cell carcinoma in Chinese populations.  Nat Genet [Medline] 
       Cardwell CR, Abnet CC, Cantwell MM, Murray LJ. Exposure to oral bisphosphonates and risk of esophageal cancer.  JAMA [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Steevens J, Schouten LJ, Goldbohm RA, van den Brandt PA. Alcohol consumption, cigarette smoking and risk of subtypes of oesophageal and gastric cancer: a prospective cohort study.  Gut [Medline] 
       Steevens J, Schouten LJ, Goldbohm RA, van den Brandt PA. Vegetables and fruits consumption and risk of esophageal and gastric cancer subtypes in the Netherlands Cohort Study.  Int J Cancer [Medline] 
       Sitas F, Egger S, Urban MI, et al. InterSCOPE study: associations between esophageal squamous cell carcinoma and human papillomavirus serological markers.  J Natl Cancer Inst [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Morson BC, Belcher JR. Adenocarcinoma of the oesophagus and ectopic gastric mucosa.  Br J Cancer [Medline] 
       Naef AP, Savary M, Ozzello L. Columnar-lined lower esophagus: an acquired lesion with malignant predisposition. Report on 140 cases of Barrett's esophagus with 12 adenocarcinomas.  J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg [Medline] 
       Bhat S, Coleman HG, Yousef F, et al. Risk of malignant progression in Barrett's esophagus patients: results from a large population-based study.  J Natl Cancer Inst [Medline] 
       Hvid-Jensen F, Pedersen L, Drewes AM, et al. Incidence of adenocarcinoma among patients with Barrett's esophagus.  N Engl J Med [Medline] 
       American Cancer Society. Cancer Facts & Figures 2013. Available at  http://www.cancer.org/acs/groups/content/@epidemiologysurveilance/documents/document/acspc-036845.pdf 
       Siegel R, Naishadham D, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2012.  CA Cancer J Clin [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Kirby TJ, Rice TW. The epidemiology of esophageal carcinoma. The changing face of a disease.  Chest Surg Clin N Am [Medline] 
       Orringer MB, Marshall B, Iannettoni MD. Transhiatal esophagectomy: clinical experience and refinements.  Ann Surg [Medline] 
       Chang AC, Ji H, Birkmeyer NJ, et al. Outcomes after transhiatal and transthoracic esophagectomy for cancer.  Ann Thorac Surg [Medline] 
       Chu KM, Law SY, Fok M, et al. A prospective randomized comparison of transhiatal and transthoracic resection for lower-third esophageal carcinoma.  Am J Surg [Medline] 
       Suzuki A, Xiao L, Hayashi Y, et al. Prognostic significance of baseline positron emission tomography and importance of clinical complete response in patients with esophageal or gastroesophageal junction cancer treated with definitive chemoradiotherapy.  Cancer [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Gillies RS, Middleton MR, Han C, et al. Role of positron emission tomography–computed tomography in predicting survival after neoadjuvant chemotherapy and surgery for oesophageal adenocarcinoma.  Brit J Surg 
       Prins MJ, Ruurda JP, van Diest PJ, van Hillegersberg R, Ten Kate FJ. The significance of the HER-2 status in esophageal adenocarcinoma for survival: an immunohistochemical and an in situ hybridization study.  Ann Oncol [Medline] 
       Nelson R. New Clinical Guidelines Issued for Esophageal Cancer. Medscape Medical News. Available at  http://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/807141 
       Varghese TK Jr,  Hofstetter WL,  Rizk NP,  Low DE,  Darling GE,  Watson TJ, et al. The society of thoracic surgeons guidelines on the diagnosis and staging of patients with esophageal cancer.  Ann Thorac Surg [Medline] 
       Dittler HJ, Siewert JR. Role of endoscopic ultrasonography in esophageal carcinoma.  Endoscopy [Medline] 
       O'Donovan PB. The radiographic evaluation of the patient with esophageal carcinoma.  Chest Surg Clin N Am [Medline] 
       Rice TW, Rusch VW, Ishwaran H, Blackstone EH. Cancer of the esophagus and esophagogastric junction: data-driven staging for the seventh edition of the American Joint Committee on Cancer/International Union Against Cancer Cancer Staging Manuals.  Cancer [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Hofstetter W, Correa AM, Bekele N, et al. Proposed modification of nodal status in AJCC esophageal cancer staging system.  Ann Thorac Surg [Medline] 
       Herbella FA, Del Grande JC, Colleoni R. Japanese Society for Disease of the Esophagus. Anatomical analysis of the mediastinal lymph nodes of normal Brazilian subjects according to the classification of the Japanese Society for Diseases of the Esophagus.  Surg Today [Medline] 
       NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology. Esophageal and Esophagogastric Junction Cancers (Excluding the proximal 5 cm of the stomach). Available at  http://www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/esophageal.pdf 
       Cooper JS, Guo MD, Herskovic A, et al. Chemoradiotherapy of locally advanced esophageal cancer: long-term follow-up of a prospective randomized trial (RTOG 85-01). Radiation Therapy Oncology Group.  JAMA [Medline] 
       Forastiere AA, Orringer MB, Perez-Tamayo C, et al. Preoperative chemoradiation followed by transhiatal esophagectomy for carcinoma of the esophagus: final report.  J Clin Oncol [Medline] 
       Sjoquist KM,  Burmeister BH,  Smithers BM,  Zalcberg JR,  Simes RJ,  Barbour A, et al. Survival after neoadjuvant chemotherapy or chemoradiotherapy for resectable oesophageal carcinoma: an updated meta-analysis.  Lancet Oncol [Medline] 
       Le Prise E, Etienne PL, Meunier B, et al. A randomized study of chemotherapy, radiation therapy, and surgery versus surgery for localized squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus.  Cancer [Medline] 
       Leichman L, Steiger Z, Seydel HG, et al. Preoperative chemotherapy and radiation therapy for patients with cancer of the esophagus: a potentially curative approach.  J Clin Oncol [Medline] 
       Nygaard K, Hagen S, Hansen HS, et al. Pre-operative radiotherapy prolongs survival in operable esophageal carcinoma: a randomized, multicenter study of pre-operative radiotherapy and chemotherapy. The second Scandinavian trial in esophageal cancer.  World J Surg [Medline] 
       Reynolds JV,  Muldoon C,  Hollywood D,  Ravi N,  Rowley S,  O'Byrne K, et al. Long-term outcomes following neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy for esophageal cancer.  Ann Surg [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Schomas DA, Quevedo JF, Donahue JM, Nichols FC 3rd, Romero Y, Miller RC. The prognostic importance of pathologically involved celiac node metastases in node-positive patients with carcinoma of the distal esophagus or gastroesophageal junction: a surgical series from the Mayo Clinic.  Dis Esophagus [Medline] 
       Gluch L, Smith RC, Bambach CP, et al. Comparison of outcomes following transhiatal or Ivor Lewis esophagectomy for esophageal carcinoma.  World J Surg [Medline] 
       Goldminc M, Maddern G, Le Prise E, et al. Oesophagectomy by a transhiatal approach or thoracotomy: a prospective randomized trial.  Br J Surg [Medline] 
       Hankins JR, Attar S, Coughlin TR Jr, et al. Carcinoma of the esophagus: a comparison of the results of transhiatal versus transthoracic resection.  Ann Thorac Surg [Medline] 
       Stiles BM, Altorki NK. Traditional techniques of esophagectomy.  Surg Clin North Am 
       Dai Y, Chopra SS, Kneif S, Hunerbein M. Management of esophageal anastomotic leaks, perforations, and fistulae with self-expanding plastic stents.  J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg [Medline] 
       Martin LW, Swisher SG, Hofstetter W, et al. Intrathoracic leaks following esophagectomy are no longer associated with increased mortality.  Ann Surg [Medline] 
       Patti MG, Corvera CU, Glasgow RE, et al. A hospital's annual rate of esophagectomy influences the operative mortality rate.  J Gastrointest Surg [Medline] 
       Nguyen NT, Roberts P, Follette DM, et al. Thoracoscopic and laparoscopic esophagectomy for benign and malignant disease: lessons learned from 46 consecutive procedures.  J Am Coll Surg [Medline] 
       Uenosono Y, Arigami T, Yanagita S, et al. Sentinel node navigation surgery is acceptable for clinical T1 and N0 esophageal cancer.  Ann Surg Oncol [Medline] 
       Ngamruengphong S, Wolfsen HC, Wallace MB. Survival of Patients With Superficial Esophageal Adenocarcinoma After Endoscopic Treatment vs Surgery.  Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol [Medline] 
       Brooks M. Endoscopic Therapy a Good Option in Early Esophageal Cancer. Medscape [serial online]. Available at  http://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/814817 
       Novak B. Salvage endoscopy viable for some esophageal cancers.  Medscape Medical News [Full Text] 
       Cunningham D, Allum WH, Stenning SP, et al. Perioperative chemotherapy versus surgery alone for resectable gastroesophageal cancer.  N Engl J Med [Medline] 
       Allum WH, Stenning SP, Bancewicz J, Clark PI, Langley RE. Long-term results of a randomized trial of surgery with or without preoperative chemotherapy in esophageal cancer.  J Clin Oncol [Medline] 
       van Hagen P,  Hulshof MC,  van Lanschot JJ,  Steyerberg EW,  van Berge Henegouwen MI,  Wijnhoven BP, et al. Preoperative chemoradiotherapy for esophageal or junctional cancer.  N Engl J Med [Medline] 
       Brooks M. Preop chemoradiation benefits confirmed in esophageal cancer.  Medscape Medical News [Full Text] 
       Oppedijk V,  van der Gaast A,  van Lanschot JJ,  van Hagen P,  van Os R,  van Rij CM, et al. Patterns of Recurrence After Surgery Alone Versus Preoperative Chemoradiotherapy and Surgery in the CROSS Trials.  J Clin Oncol [Medline] 
       Mamon HJ, Tepper JE. Combination Chemoradiation Therapy: The Whole Is More Than the Sum of the Parts.  J Clin Oncol [Medline] 
       Rohatgi PR,  Swisher SG,  Correa AM,  Wu TT,  Liao Z,  Komaki R, et al. Failure patterns correlate with the proportion of residual carcinoma after preoperative chemoradiotherapy for carcinoma of the esophagus.  Cancer [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Rao S, Welsh L, Cunningham D, et al. Correlation of overall survival with gene expression profiles in a prospective study of resectable esophageal cancer.  Clin Colorectal Cancer [Medline] 
       Alexander BM,  Wang XZ,  Niemierko A,  Weaver DT,  Mak RH,  Roof KS, et al. DNA repair biomarkers predict response to neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy in esophageal cancer.  Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys [Medline] 
       Fietkau R, Lewitzki V, Kuhnt T, et al. A disease-specific enteral nutrition formula improves nutritional status and functional performance in patients with head and neck and esophageal cancer undergoing chemoradiotherapy: results of a randomized, controlled, multicenter trial.  Cancer [Medline] 
       Tailored Enteral Formula During Chemoradiotherapy Curbs Body Mass Loss.  Medscape [Full Text] 
       [Guideline] Wong RK, Malthaner RA, Zuraw L, Rumble RB,. Combined modality radiotherapy and chemotherapy in nonsurgical management of localized carcinoma of the esophagus: a practice guideline.  Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys [Medline] 
       Chustecka Z. Second-line docetaxel affirmed for esophagogastric cancer. Medscape Medical News. Jan 23, 2013. Available at  http://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/778031 
       Ford H, Marshall A, Wadsley J, et al. Cougar-02: a randomized phase III study of docetaxel versus active symptom control in advanced esophagogastric adenocarcinoma.  J Clin Oncol 
       Homs MY, v d Gaast A, Siersema PD, et al. Chemotherapy for metastatic carcinoma of the esophagus and gastro-esophageal junction.  Cochrane Database Syst Rev [Medline] 
       Herskovic A, Martz K, al-Sarraf M, et al. Combined chemotherapy and radiotherapy compared with radiotherapy alone in patients with cancer of the esophagus.  N Engl J Med [Medline] 
       Folkert MR, Cohen GN, Wu AJ, et al. Endoluminal high-dose-rate brachytherapy for early stage and recurrent esophageal cancer in medically inoperable patients.  Brachytherapy [Medline] 
       Shaheen NJ,  Overholt BF,  Sampliner RE,  Wolfsen HC,  Wang KK,  Fleischer DE, et al. Durability of radiofrequency ablation in Barrett's esophagus with dysplasia.  Gastroenterology [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Conroy T, Galais MP, Raoul JL, et al. Definitive chemoradiotherapy with FOLFOX versus fluorouracil and cisplatin in patients with oesophageal cancer (PRODIGE5/ACCORD17): final results of a randomised, phase 2/3 trial.  Lancet Oncol [Medline] 
       Gebski V, Burmeister B, Smithers BM, et al. Survival benefits from neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy or chemotherapy in oesophageal carcinoma: a meta-analysis.  Lancet Oncol [Medline] 
       Kelsen DP,  Ginsberg R,  Pajak TF,  Sheahan DG,  Gunderson L,  Mortimer J, et al. Chemotherapy followed by surgery compared with surgery alone for localized esophageal cancer.  N Engl J Med [Medline] 
       Knyrim K, Wagner HJ, Bethge N, Keymling M, Vakil N. A controlled trial of an expansile metal stent for palliation of esophageal obstruction due to inoperable cancer.  N Engl J Med [Medline] 
       Lowry F. FOLFOX: More convenient for esophageal cancer?.  Medscape Medical News [Full Text] 
       Scheer RV, Fakiris AJ, Johnstone PA. Quantifying the benefit of a pathologic complete response after neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy in the treatment of esophageal cancer.  Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys [Medline]

Article 23:

   
     Bipolar Affective Disorder 
       Bipolar Affective Disorder: Practice Essentials, Background, Pathophysiology Bipolar Affective Disorder Clinical Presentation: History, Physical Examination Bipolar Affective Disorder Differential Diagnoses Bipolar Affective Disorder Workup: Approach Considerations, Blood Studies, Substance and Alcohol Screening Bipolar Affective Disorder Treatment & Management: Approach Considerations, Indications for Inpatient Management, Considerations for Partial Hospitalization or Day Treatment Bipolar Affective Disorder Medication: Anxiolytics, Benzodiazepines, Mood stabilizers, Anticonvulsants, Antipsychotics, 2nd Generation, Antipsychotics, 1st Generation, Antipsychotics, Phenothiazine, Antiparkinson Agents, Dopamine Agonists 
       Bipolar Affective Disorder: Practice Essentials, Background, Pathophysiology Bipolar Affective Disorder Clinical Presentation: History, Physical Examination Bipolar Affective Disorder Differential Diagnoses Bipolar Affective Disorder Workup: Approach Considerations, Blood Studies, Substance and Alcohol Screening Bipolar Affective Disorder Treatment & Management: Approach Considerations, Indications for Inpatient Management, Considerations for Partial Hospitalization or Day Treatment Bipolar Affective Disorder Medication: Anxiolytics, Benzodiazepines, Mood stabilizers, Anticonvulsants, Antipsychotics, 2nd Generation, Antipsychotics, 1st Generation, Antipsychotics, Phenothiazine, Antiparkinson Agents, Dopamine Agonists 
       Overview
 Practice Essentials Background Pathophysiology Etiology Epidemiology Prognosis Patient Education Presentation
 History Physical Examination Differential Diagnoses
 Workup
 Approach Considerations Blood Studies Substance and Alcohol Screening Magnetic Resonance Imaging Electrocardiography Electroencephalography Treatment
 Approach Considerations Indications for Inpatient Management Considerations for Partial Hospitalization or Day Treatment Considerations of Outpatient Treatment Pharmacologic Therapy Electroconvulsive Therapy Dietary and Activity Measures Complications Prevention and Long-Term Monitoring Medication
 
       Bipolar Affective Disorder Overview Bipolar Affective Disorder Clinical Presentation Bipolar Affective Disorder Differential Diagnoses Bipolar Affective Disorder Workup Bipolar Affective Disorder Treatment Bipolar Affective Disorder Medication 286342-overview Mar 16, 2015 2015-06-20-01:27 0 Psychiatry 2002 Diseases & Conditions Condition 
       1 2 content 286342 502 877 12 r458_f31_f33 
     Jun 04, 2015 
       condition Diseases & Conditions 
       psychiatry Psychiatry 
       psychiatry_adult Adult bipolar depression, bipolar disorder, bipolar symptoms, bipolar treatment, manic depression, affective disorder, mood disorder, bipolar affective disorder, bipolar disorder, bipolar I, bipolar II, subthreshold bipolar disorders, bi polar disorder, bipolar treatment, bipolar symptoms, manic-depressive disorder, manic-depressive illness, MDI, manic depression, BPI, BPII, BP1, BP2, schizophrenia, psychosis, mood disorders, cyclothymia, suicide, mania, electroconvulsive therapy, ECT, electroshock, hypomania, psychomotor agitation, grandiosity, inflated self-esteem, racing thoughts, flight of ideas, distractibility, hypersomnia, insomnia, depression, Mental Status Examination, MSE, aggression Bipolar affective disorder, or manic-depressive illness (MDI), is a common, severe, and persistent mental illness. This condition is a serious lifelong struggle and challenge. 0 
       BiPD Li MDD Bipolar Affective Disorder 
     Overview 
       Practice Essentials 
         Bipolar affective disorder, or manic-depressive illness (MDI), is a common, severe, and persistent mental illness. This condition is a serious lifelong struggle and challenge. [ 
         Signs and symptoms Bipolar affective disorder is characterized by periods of deep, prolonged, and profound depression that alternate with periods of an excessively elevated or irritable mood known as mania. Manic episodes are feature at least 1 week of profound mood disturbance, characterized by elation, irritability, or expansiveness (referred to as gateway criteria). At least 3 of the following symptoms must also be present [ 
           
             Grandiosity 
             Diminished need for sleep 
             Excessive talking or pressured speech 
             Racing thoughts or flight of ideas 
             Clear evidence of distractibility 
             Increased level of goal-focused activity at home, at work, or sexually 
             Excessive pleasurable activities, often with painful consequences Hypomanic episodes are characterized by an elevated, expansive, or irritable mood of at least 4 consecutive days’ duration. At least 3 of the following symptoms are also present [ 
           
             Grandiosity or inflated self-esteem 
             Diminished need for sleep 
             Pressured speech 
             Racing thoughts or flight of ideas 
             Clear evidence of distractibility 
             Increased level of goal-focused activity at home, at work, or sexually 
             Engaging in activities with a high potential for painful consequences Major depressive episodes are characterized as, for the same 2 weeks, the person experiences 5 or more of the following symptoms, with at least 1 of the symptoms being either a depressed mood or characterized by a loss of pleasure or interest [ 
           
             Depressed mood 
             Markedly diminished pleasure or interest in nearly all activities 
             Significant weight loss or gain or significant loss or increase in appetite 
             Hypersomnia or  insomnia 
             Psychomotor retardation or agitation 
             Loss of energy or fatigue 
             Feelings of worthlessness or excessive guilt 
             Decreased concentration ability or marked indecisiveness 
             Preoccupation with death or  suicide See  Clinical Presentation 
         Diagnosis Examination of patients with suspected bipolar affective disorder includes evaluation using the Mental Status Examination as well as assessment of the following: 
           
             Appearance 
             Affect/mood 
             Thought content 
             Perception 
             Suicide/self-destruction 
             Homicide/violence/aggression 
             Judgment/insight 
             Cognition 
             Physical health 
           Testing Although bipolar disorder is diagnosed based on the patient’s history and clinical course, laboratory studies may be necessary to rule out other potential causes of the patient’s signs and symptoms as well as to have baseline results before administering certain medications. Laboratory tests that may be helpful include the following: 
           
             CBC count 
             ESR levels 
             Fasting glucose levels 
             Electrolyte levels 
             Protein levels 
             Thyroid hormone levels 
             Creatinine and blood urea nitrogen levels 
             Liver and lipid panel 
             Substance and alcohol screening Depending on the patient’s presentation, other laboratory tests may be indicated, which may include the following: 
           
             Urinary copper levels 
             Antinuclear antibody testing 
             HIV testing 
             VDRL testing Electrocardiography is important in elderly patients and before antidepressant therapy. Electroencephalography and/or MRI may be appropriate for selected patients. See  Workup 
         Management The treatment of bipolar affective disorder is directly related to the phase of the episode (ie, depression or mania) and the severity of that phase, and it may involve a combination of psychotherapy and medication. Always evaluate patients with mania, hypomania, or mixed episode, and those with bipolar depression, for suicidality, acute or chronic psychosis, or other unstable or dangerous conditions. [ 
           Pharmacotherapy Medications used to manage patients with bipolar disorder include the following: 
           
             Benzodiazepines (eg, lorazepam, clonazepam) 
             Antimanic agents (eg, lithium) 
             Anticonvulsants (eg, carbamazepine, valproate sodium, valproic acid, divalproex sodium, lamotrigine, topiramate) 
             First-generation antipsychotics (eg, inhaled loxapine, haloperidol) 
             Second-generation antipsychotics (eg, asenapine, ziprasidone, quetiapine, risperidone, aripiprazole, olanzapine, olanzapine and fluoxetine, clozapine, paliperidone)  
             Phenothiazine antipsychotics (eg, chlorpromazine) 
             Dopamine agonists (eg, pramipexole) 
           Nonpharmacotherapy Psychotherapy may help to decrease relapse rates, improve quality of life, and/or increase functioning, or more favorable symptom improvement. [ Electroconvulsive therapy may be useful in selected patients with bipolar disorder. See  Treatment Medication 
       Background 
         Bipolar affective disorder, or manic-depressive illness (MDI), is a common, severe, and persistent mental illness. This condition is a serious lifelong struggle and challenge. [ [ Bipolar disorder is characterized by periods of deep, prolonged, and profound  depression The symptoms of mania include decreased sleep time accompanied by a decreased need for sleep, pressured speech, increased libido, reckless behavior without regard for consequences, grandiosity, and severe thought disturbances, which may or may not include psychosis. Between these highs and lows, many patients, if adequately medicated, usually experience periods of higher functionality and can lead a productive life.  Unipolar (major depressive) disorder and bipolar disorder share depressive symptoms, but bipolar disorder is defined by episodes of mania or hypomania. A community lifetime prevalence of 4% for BPI and BPII disorder combined has been suggested. The costs of bipolar disorder include the direct costs of treatment along with the even more significant indirect costs of excess unemployment, decreased productivity, and excess mortality; it is a severely impairing illness that affects many aspects of patients' lives. [ In the 5th edition of the  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders DSM-5 [ 
       Pathophysiology 
         The pathophysiology of bipolar affective disorder, or manic-depressive illness (MDI), has not been determined, and no objective biologic markers correspond definitively with the disease state. However, twin, family, and adoption studies all indicate that bipolar disorder has a significant genetic component. In fact, first-degree relatives of a person with bipolar disorder are approximately 7 times more likely to develop bipolar disorder than the rest of the population, and the heritability of bipolar I disorder (BPI) has recently been estimated at 0.73. [ 
         Genetics The genetic component of bipolar disorder appears to be complex: The condition is likely to be caused by multiple different common disease alleles, each of which contributes a relatively low degree of risk on its own. Such disease genes can be difficult to find without very large sample sizes, on the order of thousands of subjects.  When the genetics of bipolar disorder were first being studied, less precise tools were available, but they still yielded interesting information. Many loci are now known to be associated with the development of bipolar disorder. These loci are grouped as major affective disorder (MAFD) loci and numbered in the order of their discovery.  
           MAFD loci MAFD1 [ MAFD2 [ MAFD3 TRPM2 [ MAFD4 [ MAFD5 MAFD6 MAFD5 MAFD6 [ MAFD7 [ XBP1 [ XBP1 MAFD8 [ ANK3 [ MAFD9 MAFD8 CACNA1C [ ANK3 [ 
           Genome-wide association studies The first series of genome-wide association studies (GWASs) for bipolar disorder were published in 2007 and 2008, [ ANK3 CACNA1C [ ANK3 ANK3 [ Further evidence for association of bipolar disorder to  CACNA1C [ CACNA1C, A joint analysis of the bipolar GWAS data was carried out, including GWAS data from another large-scale study of schizophrenia published in the same issue. Again, both  ANK3 CACNA1C schizophrenia [ Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, Text Revision, DSM-IV-TR In 2013, the Cross-Disorder Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium published results of their large GWAS study of psychiatric disorders, reporting that specific single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are associated with range of childhood- or adult-onset psychiatric disorders. [ [ Specific expression of common genetic variants at different times during development, or in different regions of the brain, and in concert with other genetic variants could help to explain differences in disease phenotypes. Genetic markers in 4 regions were associated with all 5 disorders, including variants in the  CACNA1C CACNB2 [ CACNA1C CACNB2 [ Although the first GWAS of bipolar disorder used a much smaller sample size than subsequent attempts, including an initial sample of 461 patients with bipolar disorder from the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) consortium and a follow-up sample of 563 patients collected in Germany, it still yielded interesting observations that will need to be followed up in the larger samples mentioned earlier. [ DGKH DGKH Three of the other associated genes in this study also interact with the Wnt signaling pathway upstream and downstream of glycogen synthase kinase 3-beta (GSK3β). Lithium-mediated inhibition of GSK3β is thought to result in downregulation of molecules involved in cell death and upregulation of neuroprotective factors.  Additionally, GSK3β is a central regulator of the circadian clock, and lithium-mediated modulation of circadian periodicity is thought to be a critical component of lithium’s therapeutic effect. In fact, another major coup for bipolar disorder research has been the finding that a dominant-negative mutation in the  CLOCK [ Furthermore, the experimenters were able to abolish the manic behaviors by rescuing expression of normal  CLOCK [ [ Although large-scale association studies of bipolar disorder are beginning to yield results, one of the greatest obstacles to finding genes for such complex behavior is the imprecision inherent in diagnosis of the disorder itself; objective criteria are lacking. Therefore, some of the most exciting recent research is focused on defining heritable, quantitative diagnostic measures that capture specific features of bipolar disorder (termed endophenotypes) to refine the search for responsible genes. [ [ [ Newer GWASs continue to find additional genes of interest which appear to be associated with an increased risk of bipolar disorder. One study showed an association between bipolar disorder and the  NCAN [ NCAN NCAN [ Although most of the present research does not stratify by sex, a recent study looked at association between estrogen receptor binding site variation with bipolar disorder in females. In particular, the association is with the  transglutaminase 2 TGM2 [ Of additional interest, a number of studies suggest that certain large copy number variants (greater than 100 kb) (includes both deletions and duplications) are associated with psychiatric disease, with bipolar disease and schizophrenia being the most commonly associated. [ [ When investigators looked at microarray results for 1001 patients with bipolar disorder and 1033 controls to quantify the risk of deletions throughout the genome for patients with bipolar disorder, they found that 16.2% of patients with bipolar disorder had deletions, whereas 12.3% of controls had deletions. In addition, patients who had bipolar disorder and deletions more frequently had onset of mania before age 18 years. [ 
           Gene expression studies Gene expression studies are one way of measuring the relative activity or inactivity of genes, and they have already been proven useful for illuminating the pathophysiology of psychiatric disorders, including bipolar disorder. For example, studies comparing specific regions of postmortem brain tissue from persons with bipolar disorder with tissue from control subjects have consistently shown that levels of expression of oligodendrocyte-myelin–related genes appear to be decreased in brain tissue from persons with bipolar disorder. [ Oligodendrocytes produce myelin membranes that wrap around and insulate axons to permit the efficient conduction of nerve impulses in the brain. Therefore, loss of myelin is thought to disrupt communication between neurons, leading to some of the thought disturbances observed in bipolar disorder and related illnesses. Brain imaging studies of persons with bipolar disorder also show abnormal myelination in several brain regions associated with this illness. [ [ [ Interestingly, gene expression and neuroimaging studies of persons with schizophrenia and major depression also demonstrate similar findings, indicating that mood disorders and schizophrenia may share some biologic underpinnings, possibly related to psychosis. These types of data may also lead to the future revision of psychiatric diagnostic manuals based on a new understanding of the etiology of these disorders.  Another approach to delineating the pathophysiology of bipolar disorder involves studying changes in gene expression induced in rodent brains after administration of pharmacologic agents used to treat bipolar disorder. For example, investigators have demonstrated that 2 chemically unrelated drugs (lithium and valproate) used to treat bipolar disorder both upregulate the expression of the cytoprotective protein Bcl-2 in the frontal cortex and the hippocampus of rat brains. [ A postmortem study by Konradi et al of the hippocampus in both patients with bipolar disorder and healthy persons found that the 2 groups did not differ in the total number of hippocampal neurons. [ Neuroimaging studies of individuals with bipolar disorder or other mood disorders also suggest evidence of cell loss or atrophy in these same brain regions. Thus, another suggested cause of bipolar disorder is damage to cells in the critical brain circuitry that regulates emotion. According to this hypothesis, mood stabilizers and antidepressants are thought to alter mood by stimulating cell survival pathways and increasing levels of neurotrophic factors to improve cellular resiliency. In 2008, Mathew et al published a review of novel drugs and therapeutic targets for severe mood disorders that focus on increasing neuroplasticity and cellular resiliency. [ Post et al had previously proposed a mechanism involving electrophysiologic kindling and behavioral sensitization processes, which resonates with the neuronal injury hypothesis. [ [ Post et al’s formulation helps explain the effective role of anticonvulsant medications (eg, carbamazepine and valproate) in the prevention of the highs and lows of bipolar disorder. It also supports clinical observations that the more episodes a person experiences, the more he or she will have in the future, underscoring the need for long-term treatment.  For more information, see the Medscape Reference topic  Genetics of Bipolar Disorder 
       Etiology 
         A number of factors contribute to bipolar affective disorder, or manic-depressive illness (MDI), including genetic, biochemical, psychodynamic, and environmental factors.  
         Genetic factors Bipolar disorder, especially bipolar type I (BPI) disorder, has a major genetic component, with the involvement of the  ANK3, CACNA1C, CLOCK [ First-degree relatives of people with BPI are approximately 7 times more likely to develop BPI than the general population. Remarkably, offspring of a parent with bipolar disorder have a 50% chance of having another major psychiatric disorder. One logitudinal study found that subthreshold manic or hypomanic episodes were a diagnostic risk factor for the development of subsequent manic, mixed, or hypomanic episodes in the offspring of parents with bipolar disorder. High-risk offspring, compared with offspring of parents without bipolar disorder, also had higher rates of ADHD, disruptive behavior disorders, anxiety disorders, and substance use disorders. [ Twin studies demonstrate a concordance of 33-90% for BPI in identical twins. As identical twins share 100% of their DNA, these studies also show that environmental factors are involved, and there is no guarantee that a person will develop bipolar disorder, even if they carry susceptibility genes. Adoption studies prove that a common environment is not the only factor that makes bipolar disorder occur in families. Children whose biologic parents have either BPI or a major depressive disorder remain at increased risk of developing an affective disorder, even if they are reared in a home with adopted parents who are not affected. Frey and colleagues’ work supports the genetic contributions in bipolar affective disorder. [ Using probands from the Maudsley Twin Register in London, Cardno and colleagues showed that schizophrenic, schizoaffective, and manic syndromes share genetic risk factors and that the genetic liability was the same for  schizoaffective disorder [ [ [ Gene expression studies also demonstrate that persons with bipolar disorder, major depression, and schizophrenia share similar decreases in the expression of oligodendrocyte-myelin-related genes and abnormalities of white matter in various brain regions.  
         Biochemical factors Multiple biochemical pathways likely contribute to bipolar disorder, which is why detecting one particular abnormality is difficult. A number of neurotransmitters have been linked to this disorder, largely based on patients’ responses to psychoactive agents as in the following examples.  The blood pressure drug reserpine, which depletes catecholamines from nerve terminals, was noted incidentally to cause depression. This led to the catecholamine hypothesis, which holds that an increase in epinephrine and norepinephrine causes mania and a decrease in epinephrine and norepinephrine causes depression.  Drugs used to treat depression and drugs of abuse (eg, cocaine) that increase levels of monoamines, including serotonin, norepinephrine, or dopamine, can all potentially trigger mania, implicating all of these neurotransmitters in its etiology. Other agents that exacerbate mania include L-dopa, which implicates dopamine and serotonin-reuptake inhibitors, which in turn implicate serotonin.  Evidence is mounting of the contribution of glutamate to both bipolar disorder and major depression. A postmortem study of the frontal lobes of individuals with these disorders revealed that the glutamate levels were increased. [ Calcium channel blockers have been used to treat mania, which may also result from a disruption of intracellular calcium regulation in neurons as suggested by experimental and genetic data. The proposed disruption of calcium regulation may be caused by various neurologic insults, such as excessive glutaminergic transmission or ischemia. Interestingly, valproate specifically upregulates expression of a calcium chaperone protein, GRP 78, which may be one of its chief mechanisms of cellular protection.  Hormonal imbalances and disruptions of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis involved in homeostasis and the stress response may also contribute to the clinical picture of bipolar disorder.  
         Neurophysiologic factors In addition to structural neuroimaging studies that look for volumetric changes in brain regions regardless of brain activity, functional neuroimaging studies are performed to find regions of the brain, or specific cortical networks, that are either hypoactive or hyperactive in a particular illness. For example a meta-analysis by Houenou et al found decreased activation and diminution of gray matter in a cortical-cognitive brain network, which has been associated with the regulation of emotions in patients with bipolar disorder. [ [ 
         Psychodynamic factors Many practitioners see the dynamics of manic-depressive illness as being linked through a single common pathway. They see the depression as the manifestation of losses (ie, the loss of self-esteem and the sense of worthlessness). Therefore, the mania serves as a defense against the feelings of depression. Melanie Klein was one of the major proponents of this formulation.  A study by Barnett et al found that personality disturbances in extraversion, neuroticism, and openness are often noted in patients with bipolar disorder and may be enduring characteristics. [ 
         Environmental factors In some instances, the cycle may be directly linked to external stresses or the external pressures may serve to exacerbate some underlying genetic or biochemical predisposition. For example, pregnancy is a particular stress for women with a manic-depressive illness history and increases the possibility of postpartum psychosis. [ Because of the nature of their work, certain individuals have periods of high demands followed by periods of few requirements. For example, a landscaper and gardener who was busy in the spring, summer, and fall became relatively inactive during the winter, except for plowing snow. Consequently, he appeared manic for a good part of the year, and then he would crash and hibernate during the cold months.  
       Epidemiology 
         United States statistics The lifelong prevalence of bipolar affective disorder, or manic-depressive illness (MDI), including subsyndromal forms in the United States has been noted to range from 3.7% to 3.9%. [ [ [ 
         International statistics Globally, the lifelong prevalence rate of bipolar disorder is 0.3-1.5%. In cross-sectional, face-to-face household surveys of more than 61,000 adults across 11 countries, Merikangas et al, using the World Mental Health version of the World Health Organization Composite International Diagnostic Interview, version 3.0, determined that the aggregate lifetime prevalences were 0.6% for BPI, 0.4% for BPII, 1.4% for subthreshold bipolar disorder, and 2.4% for bipolar spectrum. [ [ [ 
         Age-related differences in incidence The age of onset of bipolar disorder varies greatly. For both BPI and BPII, the age range is from childhood to 50 years, with a mean age of approximately 21 years. Most cases of bipolar disorder commence when individuals are aged 15-19 years. The second most frequent age range of onset is 20-24 years.  Some patients diagnosed with recurrent major depression may indeed have bipolar disorder and go on to develop their first manic episode when older than 50 years. These individuals may have a family history of bipolar disorder. However, for most patients, the onset of mania in people older than 50 years should lead to an investigation for medical or neurologic disorders, such as cerebrovascular disease.  For more information, see the Medscape Reference article  Pediatric Bipolar Affective Disorder 
         Sex-related differences in incidence BPI occurs equally in both sexes; however, rapid-cycling bipolar disorder (≥4 episodes/y) is more common in women than in men. The incidence of BPII is higher in females than in males. Most studies report a nearly equal male-to-female ratio in the prevalence of bipolar disorder; however, most studies also report an increased risk in women for BPII/hypomania, rapid cycling, and mixed episodes. [ 
       Prognosis 
         Bipolar affective disorder, or manic-depressive illness (MDI), has significant morbidity and mortality rates. In the United States, during the early part of the 1990s, the cost of lost productivity resulting from this disorder was estimated at approximately $15.5 billion annually. Approximately 25-50% of individuals with bipolar disorder attempt suicide, and 11% successfully commit suicide. Additionally, a 2011 study from the United Kingdom suggested that for patients with bipolar disorder, mortality 1 year after hospital discharge was also higher than that of the general population for natural causes, chiefly respiratory and circulatory disorders. [ Patients with BPI fare worse than patients with a major depression. Within the first 2 years after the initial episode, 40-50% of these patients experience another manic attack. Only 50-60% of patients with BPI who are on lithium gain control of their symptoms. In 7% of these patients, symptoms do not recur, 45% of patients experience more episodes, and 40% go on to have a persistent disorder. Often, the cycling between depression and mania accelerates with age.  Factors suggesting a worse prognosis include the following: 
           
             Poor job history 
             Substance abuse 
             Psychotic features 
             Depressive features between periods of mania and depression 
             Evidence of depression 
             Male sex 
             Pattern of depression-mania-euthymia Factors suggesting a better prognosis include the following: 
           
             Length of manic phases (short duration) 
             Late age of onset 
             Few thoughts of suicide 
             Few psychotic symptoms 
             Few medical problems 
       Patient Education 
         Treatment of patients with bipolar affective disorder, or manic-depressive illness (MDI), involves initial and ongoing patient education. To this end, a strong therapeutic alliance is essential.  Educational efforts must be directed not only toward the patient but also toward their family and support system. Furthermore, evidence continues to mount that these educational efforts not only increase patient compliance and their knowledge of the disease, but also their quality of life. [ An explanation of the biology of the disease must be provided. This decreases feelings of guilt and promotes medication compliance. Information should be provided on how to monitor the illness in terms of an appreciation of the early warning signs, reemergence, and symptoms. Recognition of changes can serve as a powerful preventive step.  Education must also encompass the dangers of stressors. Helping the individual identify and work with stressors provides a critical aspect of patient and family awareness. Efforts should be made to educate the patient about relapses within the total context of the disorder.  Individual stories help patients and families. The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) has a story of a person with manic-depressive illness that can help the patient see the struggle and challenge from another perspective. [ [ Important resources for patients and families to gain information on dealing with manic-depressive illness include the following: 
           
             National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) nimhinfo@nih.gov 
             NIMH: Bipolar Disorder (Webpage) 
             NIMH Bipolar Disorder (booklet) 
             WebMD: Bipolar Disorder Health Center 
             The Balanced Mind Foundation info@thebalancedmind.org 
             National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI) 
             Depression & Bipolar Support Alliance (DBSA) 
             International Foundation for Research and Education on Depression (iFred) info@ifred.org 
             Mental Health America (MHA) 
             Bipolar Focus: Bipolar Disorder Support Groups 
     Clinical Presentation 
       History 
         Correct diagnosis of a disorder leads to proper effective treatment. Nowhere is that more relevant than in diagnosing a patient with bipolar affective disorder, or manic-depressive illness (MDI).  Perform a thorough clinical assessment for patients with a manic, hypomanic, or mixed episode, or those with a bipolar depression episode, including information about the patient’s clinical and psychosocial status, medical and psychiatric comorbidities, current and past medications as well as medication compliance, and substance use. [ [ The diagnosis of bipolar disorder type I (BPI) requires the presence of a manic episode of at least 1 week’s duration or that leads to hospitalization or other significant impairment in occupational or social functioning. The episode of mania cannot be caused by another medical illness or by substance abuse. These criteria are based on the specifications of the  DSM-V. [ [ Manic episodes are feature at least 1 week of profound mood disturbance, characterized by elation, irritability, or expansiveness (referred to as gateway criteria). At least 3 of the following symptoms must also be present [ 
           
             Grandiosity 
             Diminished need for sleep 
             Excessive talking or pressured speech 
             Racing thoughts or flight of ideas 
             Clear evidence of distractibility 
             Increased level of goal-focused activity at home, at work, or sexually 
             Excessive pleasurable activities, often with painful consequences The mood disturbance is sufficient to cause impairment at work or danger to the patient or others. The mood is not the result of substance abuse or a medical condition.  Hypomanic episodes are characterized by an elevated, expansive, or irritable mood of at least 4 consecutive days’ duration. At least 3 of the following symptoms are also present [ 
           
             Grandiosity or inflated self-esteem 
             Diminished need for sleep 
             Pressured speech 
             Racing thoughts or flight of ideas 
             Clear evidence of distractibility 
             Increased level of goal-focused activity at home, at work, or sexually 
             Engaging in activities with a high potential for painful consequences The mood disturbance is observable to others. The mood is not the result of substance abuse or a medical condition. The episode is not severe enough to cause social or occupational impairment.  Major depressive episodes are characterized as, for the same 2 weeks, the person experiences 5 or more of the following symptoms, with at least 1 of the symptoms being either a depressed mood or characterized by a loss of pleasure or interest [ 
           
             Depressed mood 
             Markedly diminished pleasure or interest in nearly all activities 
             Significant weight loss or gain or significant loss or increase in appetite 
             Hypersomnia or  insomnia 
             Psychomotor retardation or agitation 
             Loss of energy or fatigue 
             Feelings of worthlessness or excessive guilt 
             Decreased concentration ability or marked indecisiveness 
             Preoccupation with death or  suicide Symptoms cause significant impairment and distress and are not the result of substance abuse or a medical condition The mixed symptomatology is quite common in patients presenting with bipolar symptomatology. This often causes a diagnostic dilemma [ DSM-5. [ Of interest, when investigating bipolar mixed states, Swann and colleagues concluded that although controversy exists regarding the definitions and properties of mixed states, the concept of mixed states and their characteristics over a range of clinical definitions and diagnostic methods has remained consistent. [ [ In addition to the well-known differences between manic and hypomanic episodes, other key differences exist between BPI and BPII that may be used to help distinguish between the 2 types of conditions. Data from 1429 bipolar patients included in the National Epidemiological Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions showed significant differences between BPI and BPII patients in unemployment, a history of a suicide attempt, depressive symptoms (eg, weight gain, feelings of worthlessness), and the presence of specific phobias. [ 
       Physical Examination 
         Use the Mental Status Examination (MSE) to aid in diagnosing bipolar affective disorder, or manic-depressive illness (MDI). This section highlights the major findings for a person with bipolar disorder to help support the diagnosis. Because the patient’s mental status depends on whether he or she is depressed, hypomanic, manic, or mixed, the following discussions of the various areas of the MSE include consideration of each of these particular phases.  
         Appearance Persons experiencing a depressed episode may demonstrate poor to no eye contact. Their clothes may be unkempt, unclean, holed, unironed, and ill-fitting. If the person has lost significant weight, the garments may fit loosely.  The personal hygiene of individuals experiencing a depressed episode reflects their low mood, as evidenced by poor grooming, lack of shaving, and lack of washing. In women, fingernails may show different layers of polish or one layer partially removed, and they may not have paid attention to their hair. Men may exhibit dirty fingernails and hands. When these individuals move, their depressed affect is demonstrated: They move slowly and very little; they show psychomotor retardation; they may talk in low tones or in a depressed or monotone voice.  Persons experiencing a hypomanic episode are busy, active, and involved. They have energy and are always on the go. They are always planning and doing things. Others notice their energy levels and mood changes.  In many ways, the behavior of a patient in the manic phase is the opposite of that of a person in the depressed phase. Patients experiencing the manic phase are hyperactive and might be hypervigilant. They are restless, energized, and active. They talk and act fast. Their attire also reflects the mania: Their clothes might have been put on in haste and are disorganized. Alternately, their garments are often too bright, colorful, or garish. These individuals stand out in a crowd, because their dress frequently attracts attention.  
         Affect/mood In persons experiencing a depressed episode, sadness dominates the affect. These individuals feel sad, depressed, lost, vacant, and isolated. The "2 Hs"—  h h In persons experiencing a hypomanic episode, the mood is up, expansive, and often irritable. In persons experiencing a manic episode, the mood is inappropriately joyous, elated, and jubilant. These individuals are euphoric. They also may demonstrate annoyance and irritability, especially if the mania has been present for a significant length of time.  Persons experiencing a mixed episode exhibit both depression and mania within a brief period (≤1 wk). 
         Thought content Patients experiencing a depressed episode have thoughts that reflect their sadness. They are preoccupied with negative ideas and nihilistic concerns, and they tend to "see the glass as half empty." They are likely to focus on death and morbid persons, and many think about suicide.  Patients experiencing a hypomanic episode are optimistic, forward thinking, and have a positive attitude. Patients experiencing a manic episode have very expansive and optimistic thinking. They may be excessively self-confident or grandiose, often have a very rapid production of ideas and thoughts, perceive their minds as being very active, and see themselves as being highly engaging and creative. These individuals are highly distractible and quickly shift from one person to another.  Patients experiencing a mixed episode can oscillate dramatically between depression and euphoria, and they often demonstrate marked irritability.  
         Perceptions Two forms of a major depression are described, one with psychotic features and the other without. With psychosis, the patient experiences delusions and hallucinations that are either consistent or inconsistent with the mood. The patient’s delusions of having sinned are accompanied by guilt and remorse, or the patient feels he or she is utterly worthless and should live in total deprivation and degradation. Hence, the delusional content remains consistent with the depressed mood. Some patients experience delusions that are inconsistent with the depression, such as paranoia or persecutory delusions.  By definition, patients experiencing a hypomanic episode do not experience hallucinations, although milder manic syndromes may be accompanied by such symptoms.  Approximately three fourths of patients experiencing a manic episode have delusions. As in major depression, the delusional content is either consistent or inconsistent with the mania. Manic delusions reflect perceptions of power, prestige, position, self-worth, and glory.  Patients experiencing a mixed episode might exhibit delusions and hallucinations consistent with either depression or mania or congruent to both.  
         Suicide/self-destruction Patients experiencing a depressed episode have a very high rate of suicide. They are the individuals who attempt and succeed at killing themselves. Query patients to determine if they have any thoughts of hurting themselves (suicidal ideation) and any plans to do so. The more specific the plan, the higher the danger.  Dubovsky has reported that the highest lifetime suicide risk (17.08%) is in men with bipolar disorder and deliberate self-harm. [ [ [ As patients emerge from a period of depression, their suicide risk may increase. This may be because, as the illness remits, executive functions are improved to the point where the person is again capable of making and carrying out a plan while the subjective feeling of depression and accompanying suicidal thoughts persist.  Patients experiencing a hypomanic or manic episode have a low incidence of suicide. In mixed episodes, the depressed phases put the patient at risk for suicide.  For more information, see the Medscape Reference article  Suicide 
         Homicide/violence/aggression In patients experiencing a depressed episode, suicide generally remains the paramount issue. However, certain persons in the depths of a depression see the world as hopeless and helpless not only for themselves but also for others. Frequently, that perspective can create and lead to a homicide followed by a suicide.  For example, a 42-year-old mother of 2 was experiencing a significant depression as part of her bipolar disorder. She believed the earth was doomed and was a terrible place to dwell. Furthermore, she thought that if she died, her children would be left in a wretched place. Because of this view, she planned to kill her 2 children and then herself. Fortunately, her family recognized the state of affairs, which led to an emergency intervention and her hospitalization.  Patients who are hypomanic frequently show evidence of irritability and aggressiveness. They can be pushy and impatient with others.  Persons experiencing a manic episode can be openly combative and aggressive. They have no patience or tolerance for others, and they can be highly demanding, violently assertive, and highly irritable. The homicidal element is particularly likely to emerge if these individuals have a delusional content to their mania. These individuals act out of the grandiose belief that others must obey their commands, wishes, and directives. They may become violent toward those who do not comply with their demands. For example, a patient believing oneself to be a king will command others to fully, completely, and immediately follow his commands. The lack of compliance may make the patient violent.If the delusions become persecutory in nature, he may defend himself against others in a homicidal fashion.  Persons experiencing a mixed episode may exhibit aggression, especially in the manic phases. Volavka reported that, relative to the general population, there has been a statistically significant increase in the risk of violence in individuals with schizophrenia and those with bipolar disorder. [ [ 
         Judgment/insight In persons experiencing a depressive episode, the depression clouds and dims their judgment and colors their insights. They fail to make important plans/actions, because they are so down and preoccupied with their own plight. These individuals see no tomorrow; therefore, planning for it is difficult. Frequently, persons in the middle of a depression have done things such as forgetting to pay their income taxes. At that time, they have little insight into their behavior. Often, others have to persuade them to seek therapy because of their lack of insight.  Persons experiencing a hypomanic episode generally act expansively and may demonstrate poor judgment by taking on too many tasks or becoming overinvolved. Often, their distractibility impairs their judgment, and they have little insight into their driven qualities. They see themselves as productive and conscientious, not as hypomanic.  In patients experiencing a manic episode, judgment is seriously impaired. These persons make terrible decisions in their work and family. For example, they may invest the family fortune in very questionable programs, become professionally overinvolved in work activities or with coworkers, or start dramatically unsound fiscal or professional ventures. These individuals ignore feedback, suggestions, and advice from friends, family, and colleagues. They have no insight into the extreme nature of their demands, plans, and behavior. Often, commitment proves the only way to contain them.  In persons experiencing a mixed episode, major shifts in affect during short lengths of time severely impair their judgment and interfere with their insight.  
         Cognition Impairments in orientation and memory are seldom observed in patients with bipolar disorder unless they are very psychotic. They know the time and their location, and they recognize people. They can remember immediate, recent, and distant events. In some cases of hypomanic and even manic episodes, their ability to recall information can be extremely vivid and expanded. However, later in the course of their illness, their cognition becomes impaired. In extremes of depression and mania, these individuals may experience difficulty in concentrating and focusing. Similar to subcortical dementia, depression impairs cognition.  
         Physical health Although the MSE has been used in this article to highlight key aspects of the examination, the clinician must pay particular attention to the patient’s physical health. As Fagiolini pointed out, patients with bipolar disorder have a high incidence of endocrine disorders, cardiovascular disorders, and obesity, [ [ 
     Differential Diagnoses 
       Diagnostic Considerations The diagnosis of bipolar affective disorder, or manic-depressive illness (MDI), is based on the patient’s history and clinical course.  Other conditions to be considered include the following: 
         
           Epilepsy 
           Fahr disease 
           Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) 
           Medications (eg, antidepressants can propel a patient into mania; other medications may include baclofen, bromide, bromocriptine, captopril, cimetidine, corticosteroids, cyclosporine, disulfiram, hydralazine, isoniazid, levodopa, methylphenidate, metrizamide, procarbazine, procyclidine)  
           Circadian rhythm desynchronization 
           Cyclothymic disorder 
           Multiple personality disorder 
           Oppositional defiant disorder (in children) 
           Substance abuse disorders (eg, with alcohol, amphetamines, cocaine, hallucinogens, opiates) 
       
         Anxiety Disorders 
         Head Trauma 
         Hyperthyroidism 
         Hypothyroidism 
         Iatrogenic Cushing Syndrome 
         Lyme Disease 
         Multiple Sclerosis 
         Neurosyphilis 
         Pediatric Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder 
         Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation for Systemic Lupus Erythematosus 
         Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 
         Schizoaffective Disorder 
         Schizophrenia 
         Seasonal Affective Disorder 
     Workup 
       Approach Considerations 
         A number of reasons exist for obtaining selected laboratory studies in patients with bipolar affective disorder, or manic-depressive illness (MDI). An extensive range of tests is indicated, because bipolar disorder encompasses both depression and mania and because a significant number of medical causes for each state exists. The basic principle remains, "Do not miss a treatable medical cause for the mental status."  Second, the condition necessitates use of a number of medications that require certain body systems to be working properly. For example, lithium requires an intact genitourinary (GU) system and can affect certain other systems, and certain anticonvulsants can suppress bone marrow.  Third, because bipolar illness is a lifelong disorder, performing certain baseline studies is important to establish any long-term effects of the medications.  A number of infections, especially chronic infections, can produce a presentation of depression in the patient. An encephalitis can dramatically manifest as changes in mental status and, in rare situations, present with bipolar features.  
       Blood Studies 
         Complete blood count A complete blood count (CBC) with differential is used to rule out anemia as a cause of depression in bipolar affective disorder, or manic-depressive illness (MDI). Treatment, especially with certain anticonvulsants, may depress the bone marrow—hence the need to check the red blood cell (RBC) and white blood cell (WBC) counts for signs of bone marrow suppression.  Lithium may cause a reversible increase in the WBC count. 
         Erythrocyte sedimentation rate The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) is determined to look for any underlying disease process such a lupus or an infection. An elevated ESR often indicates an underlying disease process.  
         Fasting glucose In some cases, a fasting glucose level is indicated to rule out diabetes. In addition, atypical antipsychotics have been associated with weight gain and problems with blood glucose regulation in patients with diabetes, therefore, a baseline fasting glucose should be obtained.  
         Electrolytes Serum electrolyte concentrations are measured to help diagnose electrolyte problems, especially with sodium, that are related to depression. Treatment with lithium can lead to renal problems and electrolyte problems, and low sodium levels can lead to higher lithium levels and lithium toxicity. Hence, in screening candidates for lithium therapy as well as those on lithium therapy, checking electrolytes is indicated.  Serum calcium is assessed to diagnose hypercalcemia and hypocalcemia associated with mental status changes (eg, hyperparathyroidism). An elevated calcium blood level can cause depression or mania. Hyperparathyroidism, as evidenced by an elevated calcium blood level, produces depression. Certain antidepressants, such as nortriptyline, affect the heart; therefore, checking calcium levels is important.  
         Proteins Low serum protein levels found in patients who are depressed may be a result of not eating. Such low levels increase the availability of certain medications, because these drugs have less protein to which to bind.  
         Thyroid hormones Thyroid tests are performed to rule out hyperthyroidism (mania) and hypothyroidism (depression). Treatment with lithium can cause hypothyroidism, and hypothyroidism may cause rapid cycling of mood, especially in women.  In a study to assess the relationship between bipolar affective disorder and thyroid dysfunction, Krishna et al found that elevated T3 hormone had a statistically significantly association with bipolar disorder. [ [ 
         Creatinine and blood urea nitrogen Kidney failure can present as depression. Treatment with lithium can affect urinary clearances, and serum creatinine and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) levels can increase; however, other signs and symptoms of kidney failure will appear first. Carefully and regularly monitor renal function.  
         Liver and lipid panel Antipsychotics agents have also been associated with changes in patients’ lipid profiles, potentially resulting in dyslipidemia (eg, hypertriglyceridemia), as well as liver damage/dysfunction.  
         Other laboratory tests Although not a routine screening test in bipolar disorder and unnecessary in patients with normal liver function test results, urine copper level testing may be performed to rule out Wilson disease, which produces mental changes. Wilson disease is a rare condition that is easily missed.  Antinuclear antibody testing is used to rule out lupus. Testing for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) may be helpful. Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) causes changes in mental status, including dementia and depression.  Obtaining a Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) test may be indicated in selected patients. Syphilis, especially in its later stage, alters mental status.  
       Substance and Alcohol Screening 
         Alcohol abuse and abuse of a wide variety of drugs can present as either mania or depression. For example, speed (ie, amphetamines) and cocaine abuse can present as a manialike disorder, and barbiturate abuse can present as a depressionlike disorder. A number of patients with bipolar affective disorder, or manic-depressive illness (MDI), also have a drug or alcohol addiction; that is, they have dual diagnoses. Indeed, relative to other mental illnesses, individuals with bipolar disorder have a disproportionately high rate of substance use disorders, a co-occurrence that is associated with significant morbidity and mortality. [ Performing a substance screen helps to make this dual diagnosis. If the patient has a dual diagnosis, addiction-focused treatment should be coordinated with the treatment of bipolar disorder. [ 
       Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
         The total value of performing magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in a patient with bipolar affective disorder, or manic-depressive illness (MDI), remains unclear; however, a couple of reasons do exist for performing an imaging study. Because manic-depressive illness is a lifelong disease, a strong battery of studies rules out any other medical etiology and establishes a baseline. Some investigators report that patients with mania demonstrate hyperintensity in their temporal lobes.  
       Electrocardiography 
         Many of the antidepressants, especially the tricyclic agents and some of the antipsychotics, can affect the heart and cause conduction problems. Lithium also can lead to changes such as reversible flattening or inversion of T waves on electrocardiography (ECG). In older patients with bipolar affective disorder, or manic-depressive illness (MDI), on lithium or tricyclic antidepressant therapy, a pretreatment ECG is important.  
       Electroencephalography 
         Generally, routine electroencephalography (EEG) is unnecessary in the evaluation of bipolar affective disorder, or manic-depressive illness (MDI). However, some reasons for ordering EEG in patients with bipolar illness may be appropriate and include the following:  
           
             EEG provides a baseline and helps to rule out any neurologic problems; use this test to rule out a seizure disorder and brain tumor  
             If electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is contemplated, an EEG may be helpful; EEG monitoring during ECT is used to determine the occurrence and duration of seizure  
             Some studies have shown that abnormalities in EEG findings have been indicative of anticonvulsant effectiveness; specifically, an abnormal EEG finding may predict the response to valproate  
             Some patients may have seizures when on medications, especially antidepressants; in addition, lithium can cause diffuse slowing throughout the brain  
     Treatment & Management 
       Approach Considerations 
         Always evaluate patients with mania, hypomania, or mixed episode, and those with bipolar depression, for suicidality, acute or chronic psychosis, or other unstable or dangerous conditions. [ The treatment of bipolar affective disorder, or manic-depressive illness (MDI), is directly related to the phase of the episode (ie, depression or mania) and the severity of that phase. For example, a person who is extremely depressed and exhibits suicidal behavior requires inpatient treatment. In contrast, an individual with a moderate depression who still can work would be treated as an outpatient. Fortunately, most patients recover from the first manic episode, but their course beyond that is variable. [ It is important to determine whether current medications may be causing the patient’s manic, hypomanic, or mixed manic episode. In such patients, discontinue antidepressants or other mania-inducing agents. However, antidepressants known to have associated discontinuation syndromes should be tapered over several weeks. [ Evaluate and closely monitor patients with bipolar depression for the risk for mood destabilization or switching to mania and for the presence of emergent symptoms following initiation of pharmacotherapy for a depressive episode. [ The patient’s response to treatment may depend on the number of previous episodes of bipolar disorder. In a report that analyzed pooled data, the importance of early intervention was demonstrated with better treatment responses in individuals who had earlier stages of illness. [ [ [ If the patient is in a short-term inpatient care unit and has not made significant progress, reevaluate the management strategy. Transfer to a long-term inpatient care unit might also be considered. If the patient is in a depressed or manic phase and is not responding to medications, transfer the patient to a facility where electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) can be administered. Additionally, consultation with a psychiatric colleague or a psychopharmacologist is always appropriate if the patient does not respond to conventional treatment and medication.  All patients with bipolar disorder need outpatient monitoring for both medications and psychotherapy. In addition, these individuals need education regarding their condition. The schedule must be regular, with great flexibility if they need extra sessions. The 2010 Veterans Administration/Department of Defense (VA/DoD) clinical practice guideline for management of bipolar disorder recommends reassessing patients who start treatment for acute bipolar mania, hypomania, or mixed episodes every 1-2 weeks for at least 6 weeks. [ [ Evaluate the patient’s response to treatment with the same standardized tool at follow-up visits, after changes in therapy, and with periodic assessments until complete remission has been reached. [ http://www.cqaimh.org/stable.html No surgical care is indicated for bipolar disorder. Historically, treatment was attempted with psychosurgical procedures, such as prefrontal lobotomy. However, lobotomy is no longer used in the clinical care of patients with bipolar disorder. 
       Indications for Inpatient Management 
         Patients diagnosed with bipolar mania or depression and severe symptoms must be referred for urgent/emergent mental health intervention. [ 
           
             Danger to self 
             Danger to others 
             Delirium 
             Marked psychotic symptoms 
             Total inability to function 
             Total loss of control (eg, excessive spending, undertaking a dangerous trip) 
             Medical conditions that warrant medication monitoring (eg, substance withdrawal/intoxication) Patients with a possible diagnosis of bipolar depression must also be referred for urgent/emergent mental health intervention if they present with serious delusion, visual/auditory hallucinations, confusion, catatonic behavior, extreme negativism/mutism, and/or inappropriate affect of a bizarre or odd quality. [ A patient with bipolar disorder, especially one in a depressive episode, may present with a significant risk for suicide, especially those with an early onset of symptoms. [ [ Goldstein and associates followed the mental health of 413 youths diagnosed with bipolar disorders and found that 76 (18%) attempted suicide at least once within 5 years of study; of these youths, 31 (8% of the overall group and 41% of those who attempted suicide) made many attempts. [ [ Patients with bipolar disorder can also become a threat to others. For example, a patient experiencing a severe depression believed the world was so bleak that she planned to kill her children to spare them from the world’s misery.  Sometimes, patient’s behaviors are totally out of control, which is a particular concern during a manic episode. In this situation, patients’ behaviors are so beyond limits that they destroy their career and can be harmful to those around them. For example, a delusional patient having a manic episode believed everyone was against him; he searched for a rifle in order to defend himself and to “get them” before they “got” him.  Some patients with bipolar disorder have other medical conditions for which medication monitoring is warranted. For example, patients with certain cardiac conditions should be in a medical environment where the effects of the psychotropic medications can be monitored and observed closely.  In the clearest case of the bipolar/depressed phase, the patient is suicidal and homicidal in a few situations (this can result in homicide followed by suicide). In these scenarios, institutioinal commitment is in order and indicated. In other situations, the depression has led to an inability of the patient to work, eat, and function; hospitalization is also indicated in these cases.  In the situation of a patient in the bipolar/manic phase, although the patient does not show clear and dramatic evidence of homicide or suicide, a pattern of very poor judgment and impairment emerges. Because of their behavior during the manic phase, the person often does major damage to their finances, career, and position in the community. This type of self-destructive mania calls for containment with good documentation and family support.  
       Considerations for Partial Hospitalization or Day Treatment 
         In general, patients with bipolar affective disorder, or manic-depressive illness (MDI), who are candidates for partial hospitalization or day treatment experience severe symptoms but have some level of control and a stable living environment. For example, a patient with severe depression who has thoughts of suicide but no plans to act upon them and who has a high degree of motivation can get well when given a great deal of interpersonal support, especially during the day, and with the help of a very involved and supportive family. The family needs to be home every night and should be very concerned with the patient’s care.  Partial hospitalization also offers a bridge to return to work. Returning directly to work is often difficult for patients with severe symptoms, and partial hospitalization provides support and interpersonal relationships.  
       Considerations of Outpatient Treatment 
         Outpatient treatment for patients with bipolar affective disorder, or manic-depressive illness (MDI), has 4 major goals, as follows:  
           
             Look at areas of stress and find ways to handle them: The stresses can stem from family or work, but if they accumulate, they propel the person into mania or depression; this is a form of psychotherapy  
             Monitor and support the medication: Medications make an incredible difference, and the key is to obtain the benefits while avoiding adverse effects; patients are ambivalent about their medications—although they recognize that the drugs help and prevent hospitalizations, they also resent that they need them; the goal is to address their feelings and allow them to continue with the medications  
             Develop and maintain the therapeutic alliance: This is one of the many reasons for the practitioner to deal with the patient’s ambivalence about the medications; over time, the strength of the alliance helps keep the patient’s symptoms at a minimum and helps the patient remain in the community  
             Provide education (see Patient Education): The clinician must help educate both the patient and the family about bipolar illness; patients and families need to be aware of the dangers of substance abuse, the situations that would lead to relapse, and the essential role of medications; support groups for patients and families are of tremendous importance  Psychotherapy helps patients with bipolar disorder but does not cure the disorder by itself. When Schottle and colleagues looked at psychotherapy for patients, family, and caregivers, they found that although results were heterogeneous, most studies demonstrated relevant positive results in regard to decreased relapse rates, improved quality of life, increased functioning, or more favorable symptom improvement. [ Somatic health issues in individuals with bipolar disorder are ubiquitous, underrecognized, and suboptimally treated. [ [ Patients with chronic medical illnesses and depression should be treated with a comprehensive approach involving the patient, the family, the support team, the physician, other professionals, and community resources. Such models, called Collaborative Chronic Care Models (CCMs), have been developed to improve outcomes in chronically ill patients treated in the primary care setting who also suffer from depression. CCMs were defined a priori as interventions with at least 3 of the 6 components of the Improving Chronic Illness Care initiative, as follows:  
           
             Patient self-management support 
             Clinical information systems 
             Delivery system redesign 
             Decision support 
             Organizational support 
             Community resource linkages When Woltmann et al examined this approach in patients with bipolar disorder, they concluded that CCMs can improve both mental and physical outcomes for patients with mental disorders across a wide range of care settings. [ [ 
       Pharmacologic Therapy 
         Appropriate medication depends on the stage of the bipolar affective disorder, or manic-depressive illness (MDI), the patient is experiencing. Thus, a number of drugs are indicated for an acute manic episode, primarily the antipsychotic agents, valproate, and benzodiazepines (eg, lorazepam, clonazepam). The choice of agent depends on the presence of symptoms such as psychotic symptoms, agitation, aggression, and sleep disturbance. (See the list of medications for bipolar disorder in Table 1, below.) For patients with bipolar affective disorder in the depressed phase, the Medscape Reference article  Depression 
           Table 1. FDA-Approved Bipolar Treatment Regimens 
             
               
                 
                   Generic Name 
                 
                   Trade Name 
                 
                   Manic 
                 
                   Mixed 
                 
                   Maintenance 
                 
                   Depression 
               
                 Valproate 
                 Depakote 
                 X 
                   
                   
                   
               
                 Carbamazepine extended release 
                 Equetro 
                 X 
                 X 
                   
                   
               
                 Lamotrigine 
                 Lamictal 
                   
                   
                 X 
                   
               
                 Lithium 
                   
                 X 
                   
                 X 
                   
               
                 Aripiprazole 
                 Abilify 
                 X 
                 X 
                 X 
                   
               
                 Ziprasidone 
                 Geodon 
                 X 
                 X 
                   
                   
               
                 Risperidone 
                 Risperdal 
                 X 
                 X 
                   
                   
               
                 Asenapine 
                 Saphris 
                 X 
                 X 
                   
                   
               
                 Quetiapine 
                 Seroquel 
                 X 
                   
                   
                 X 
               
                 Chlorpromazine 
                 Thorazine 
                 X 
                   
                   
                   
               
                 Olanzapine 
                 Zyprexa 
                 X 
                 X 
                 X 
                   
               
                 Olanzapine/fluoxetine combination 
                 Symbyax 
                   
                   
                   
                 X 
               
                 FDA = United States Food and Drug Administration. Source: http://www.medscape.org/viewarticle/554128 [ Bauer and colleagues have suggested 2 approaches to treatment options in bipolar patients. [ [ [ One cautionary note of interest: Post and colleagues found that the more different antidepressant trials the patient with bipolar disorder has received, the less responsive they become to treatment. [ Inhaled loxapine (Adasuve) is the first noninjectable therapy approved by the FDA to treat acute agitation associated with schizophrenia and bipolar disorder type I (BPI). The FDA approval was based on 2 phase III studies of 658 individuals; statistically significant reductions in agitation were apparent starting 10 minutes following administration compared with placebo, and these effects were sustained at 2 hours. [ 
         Severe mania or mixed episodes Combined therapy with an antipsychotic agent and another antimanic medication is recommended for patients with severe mania or mixed episodes, with or without psychotic features. [ [ Despite the serious side effects associated with clozapine, the Veterans Administration/Department of Defense (VA/DoD) suggest this drug may be added to existing medications if it was successfully used previously for severe mania or mixed episodes or if other antipsychotic agents are unsuccessful. [ Reevaluate nonhospitalized patients being treated for severe mania or mixed episodes every 2-5 days until symptomatic improvement, and adjust medication dosages and regimens as needed. [ [ 
         Mania/hypomania or mixed episodes Initiate lithium, valproate, carbamazepine, aripiprazole, olanzapine, quetiapine, risperidone, or ziprasidone in patients with mania. [ [ It is not recommended that topiramate, lamotrigine, and gabapentin be used to treat patients with mania or mixed episodes. [ 
         Bipolar depression The American Psychiatric Association's (APA) 2005 guideline watch  for the treatment of patients with bipolar disorder noted that [ [ 
           Monotherapy The VA/DoD considers first-line monotherapy in adult patients with bipolar depression to include quetiapine, lamotrigine, or lithium. [ [ Although the VA/DoD found insufficient evidence for or against the use of valproate, carbamazepine, topiramate, risperidone, ziprasidone, or clozapine for managing bipolar depression, it did advise against aripiprazole monotherapy in patients with acute bipolar depression, except in cases in which there was [ 
           Combination therapy In patients whose bipolar depression is unresponsive to monotherapy, consider the combination of lithium with lamotrigine. [ [ As in severe mania or severe mixed episodes, consider adding clozapine for augmentation, and closely monitor the patient for metabolic or other adverse effects. [ The VA/DoD found insufficient evidence for or against the use of augmentation with aripiprazole, olanzapine, risperidone, haloperidol, oxcarbazepine, topiramate, ziprasidone, valproate, or carbamazepine in bipolar depression. [ [ 
           Dosing or medication adjustments Switch to another effective treatment for patient intolerance to side effects. For patients that switch into mania or hypomania or enter a mixed manic state, follow the recommendations discussed above in Mania/hypomania or mixed episodes.  Reevaluate patients every 1-2 weeks for a minimum of 6 weeks. As noted earlier, the therapeutic range of lithium is a serum trough concentration between 0.6-1.2 mEq/L; for valproate, 50-125 mcg/mL; and for carbamazepine, 4-12 mcg/mL. [ [ In patients with a partial treatment response (no response 2-4 weeks after initiation of an adequate medication dose), consider augmenting the medication with additional agents as discussed under Combination therapy,discontinuing the current drug (tapered withdrawal with monitoring for antidepressant syndrome and mood destabilization) and switching to another effective agent, or electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) if multiple trials of switching medications/augmentation strategies have been unsuccessful. [ 
         Other considerations A study by Bauer et al suggested that lithium may also have a neuroprotective role. [ [ Atypical antipsychotics are increasingly being used for the treatment of both acute mania and mood stabilization. The broad range of antidepressants and ECT are used for an acute depressive episode (ie, major depression). However, ECT may also be considered for patients with severe mania or treatment-resistant mania, those who prefer ECT, and pregnant women with severe mania. [ [ Diazgranados and colleagues reported that for patients with treatment-resistant bipolar depression, impressive and swift antidepressant effects occurred when a single intravenous (IV) dose of the  N D [ Although antidepressant medications are most often prescribed for patients with bipolar disorder who are experiencing an acute depression, a study found that antidepressants were not statistically superior to placebo or other current standard treatment for bipolar depression. [ Clinical experiences have shown that patients with bipolar disorder have fewer episodes of mania and depression when treated with mood-stabilizing drugs. [ [ Atypical antipsychotics (including ziprasidone, quetiapine, risperidone, aripiprazole, olanzapine, and asenapine) are also now frequently used to stabilize acute mania—or even to treat bipolar depression in some cases.  In the treatment of depression associated with bipolar disorder type II, Swartz and associates reported that 95% of relevant trials were published later than 2005. [ [ 
         Maintenance The role of mood stabilizers and antipsychotic medications in maintaining patients with bipolar disorder is well documented, [ [ Popovic et al suggested the use of a Polarity Index to guide the choice of maintenance therapy in bipolar patients. [ [ [ 
           
             Risperidone: 12.09 
             Aripiprazole: 4.38 
             Ziprasidone: 3.91 
             Olanzapine: 2.98 
             Lithium: 1.39 
             Quetiapine: 1.14 
             Lamotrigine: 0.40 Note that Popovic et al indicated the respective polarity indices for valproate and oxcarbazepine were potentially unreliable owing to the failure of their maintenance trials. [ There have been concerns that ziprasidone may have adverse effects on body weight, fasting lipids, and fasting glucose. When Pappadopulos et al looked at a comprehensive set of analyses of metabolic alternations in patients on this medication, they found no significant differences between the ziprasidone and placebo groups in levels of fasting triglycerides, total cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, or glucose in the controlled studies. [ According to a multiple treatments meta-analysis of treatments for acute mania, the most efficacious treatments are haloperidol, risperidone, and olanzapine, significantly outperforming primary mood stabilizers and other antipsychotic medications. [ [ [ [ [ As outlined in the APA’s 2002 clinical practice guideline, [ Children and adolescents who have bipolar disorder are particularly challenging to treat, and their discussion is beyond the scope of this article (see the Medscape Reference article  Pediatric Bipolar Affective Disorder [ There is evidence that risperidone may be the best first-line treatment for childhood mania, as shown in a randomized controlled trial with patients aged 6 to 15 years with a  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, Text Revision, DSM-IV-TR) [ [ 
         Caution in polyantipsychotic therapy in bipolar disorder In August 2010, the FDA announced that lamotrigine carries a risk of aseptic meningitis. [ In a study that sought to evaluate the safety and tolerability of second-generation antipsychotic (SGA) polytherapy compared with monotherapy in patients with bipolar disorder receiving open naturalistic treatment in the 22-site Systematic Treatment Enhancement Program for Bipolar Disorder (STEP-BD), Brooks et al concluded that although polytherapy was fairly common in bipolar disorder, it was also associated with increased side effects (eg, dry mouth, sexual dysfunction, and constipation) and increased health service use (almost threefold) but not with improved clinical status or function. [ [ 
       Electroconvulsive Therapy 
         Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is useful in a number of instances in patients with bipolar affective disorder, or manic-depressive illness (MDI), such as the following [ 
           
             When rapid, definitive medical/psychiatric treatment is needed 
             When the risks of ECT are less than that of other treatments 
             When the bipolar disorder is refractory to an adequate trial with other treatment strategies 
             When the patient prefers this treatment modality Often, the severity of the patient’s symptoms, the lack of response to medications, or the presence of contraindications to certain medications necessitates the use of ECT. This treatment modality has proven to be highly effective in the treatment of acute mania. The 2010 Department of Veterans Affairs/Department of Defense (VA/DoD) clinical practice guideline for management of bipolar disorder indicates ECT is the primary therapy in bipolar disorder patients that present with psychotic symptoms, catatonia, severe suicidality, food refusal leading to nutritional compromise, or who have a history of previous positive response to ECT. [ [ 
       Dietary and Activity Measures 
         Unless the patient with bipolar affective disorder, or manic-depressive illness (MDI), is on monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), no special diet is required. Patients should be advised not to make significant changes in their salt intake, because increased salt intake may lead to reduced serum lithium levels and reduced efficacy, and reduced intake may lead to increased levels and toxicity.  Although a meta-analysis by Starris et al found strong evidence that bipolar depressive symptoms may be improved by adjunctive use of omega-3, omega-3 does not improve bipolar mania. [ Patients in the depressed phase are encouraged to exercise. These individuals should try to develop a regular daily schedule of major activities, especially times of going to bed and waking up. Propose a regular exercise schedule for all patients, especially those with bipolar disorder. Both the exercise and the regular schedule are keys to surviving this illness. However, increases in exercise level, with increased perspiration, can lead to increased serum lithium levels and lithium toxicity.  
       Complications 
         The main complications of bipolar affective disorder, or manic-depressive illness (MDI), are suicide, homicide, and addictions. Previously or currently suicidal patients remain at risk for suicide. Patients emerging from a depression are thought to be at an increased risk for suicide. The risk of self-destructive behavior and death is lifelong. Hong et al’s study demonstrated a genetic link between bipolar disorder and suicidal behavior, especially in white individuals. [ [ The European Mania in Bipolar Longitudinal Evaluation of Medication (EMBLEM) study, a 2-year prospective, observational study, suggested the following characteristics found in patients with bipolar disorder who are suicidal may help identify subjects at risk for suicidal behavior [ 
           
             Female sex 
             A history of alcohol abuse 
             A history of substance abuse 
             Young age at first treatment for a mood episode 
             Longer disease duration 
             Greater depressive symptom severity (5-item Hamilton Depression Rating Scale [HAMD-5] total score) 
             Current benzodiazepine use 
             Higher overall symptom severity (Clinical Global Impression-Bipolar Disorder [CGI-BP]: mania and overall score) 
             Poor compliance Homicidal patients, often in the manic phase, can be very demanding and grandiose. In this context, they are angered if others do not immediately comply with their wishes, and they can turn dramatically violent. In addition, these individuals can become homicidal by acting on delusions.  Individuals with bipolar disorder are at risk for an addiction. This creates the problem of a dual diagnosis and, therefore, complicates treatment.  One area of major concern is the relationship between violent crime and bipolar disorder. This danger is particularly present and prominent with patients who have a substance abuse problem. [ Quality of life (QOL) has been an important way to look at the effects of mental illness. Bipolar disorder type I (BPI) results in diminished quality of life as measured by health utility and QOL and utility-based health-related quality of life. The QOL losses in patients with BPI were less than those in persons with schizophrenia. The patients with depression sustained the greatest loss in QOL. [ In a study by Fiedorowicz et al, hypomania symptoms were frequently associated with progression to bipolar disorder, even when symptoms were low intensity; however, most patients did not have hypomania symptoms at baseline. [ Some of the most challenging situations involve children and adolescents with severe emotional lability. Often, psychiatrists have applied the bipolar diagnosis to this group. Leibenluft reviewed this situation and concluded that children have increasingly been diagnosed with bipolar disorder. [ Severe mood dysregulation is a syndrome formulated to describe the symptoms of children who do not clearly meet the criteria for bipolar disorder. Leibenluft’s findings revealed that nonepisodic irritability in youths is common and is associated with an elevated risk for anxiety and unipolar depressive disorders (not bipolar disorders) in adulthood. In fact, data suggest that children and adolescents with severe mood dysregulation have lower familiar rates of bipolar disorder than children and adolescents with bipolar disorder.  
       Prevention and Long-Term Monitoring 
         Prevention is the key to the long-term treatment of bipolar affective disorders, , or manic-depressive illness (MDI), as follows: 
           
             First, use medications such as lithium serve as mood stabilizers 
             Second, psychoeducation is instituted for the patient and the patient’s family; it is critical that the patient and the patient’s family understand and recognize the importance of medication compliance and the early signs of mania and depression  Regardless of the pharmacologic regimen chosen in individual patients with acute bipolar mania, hypomania, or mixed episodes, and those with bipolar depression, reevaluate for treatment response every 1-2 weeks for a minimum of 6 weeks. [ [ 
           
             Depressive symptoms (or changes in), suicidal/homicide ideation 
             Neurovegetative symptoms 
             New-onset/change in psychotic symptoms or manic/hypomanic symptoms 
             Illicit substance use 
             Medication side effects and compliance 
             Medical stability 
             Significant psychosocial changes Reevaluate all patients for treatment response at 4-8 weeks, after each change in treatment, and periodically until full remission is achieved. [ Treat adult patients who have had an acute manic episode for a minimum of 6 months after the initial episode is controlled; encourage these individuals—as well as those who have had more than 1 manic episode or with 1 manic and 1 depressive episode, or 3 or more depressive episodes—to continue on lifelong prophylactic pharmacotherapy. [ [ 
     Medication 
       Medication Summary Appropriate medication for managing bipolar affective disorder, or manic-depressive illness (MDI), depends on the stage the patient is experiencing. The choice of agent depends on the presence of symptoms such as psychotic symptoms, agitation, aggression, and sleep disturbance. Drug categories include mood stabilizers, anticonvulsants, and antipsychotics  
       Anxiolytics, Benzodiazepines 
         Class Summary By binding to specific receptor sites, benzodiazepines appear to potentiate the effects of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and facilitate inhibitory GABA neurotransmission and the action of other inhibitory transmitters.  
         Lorazepam (Ativan) Lorazepam is an anxiolytic hypnotic with an intermediate onset of effects and a relatively intermediate half-life. By increasing the action of GABA, which is a major inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain, it may depress all levels of the central nervous system (CNS), including the limbic and reticular formation.  
         Clonazepam (Klonopin) Clonazepam is a long-acting benzodiazepine that increases presynaptic GABA inhibition and reduces monosynaptic and polysynaptic reflexes. It suppresses muscle contractions by facilitating inhibitory GABA neurotransmission and other inhibitory transmitters.  
       Mood stabilizers 
         Class Summary Lithium is the drug commonly used for prophylaxis and treatment of manic episodes. A 2012 study suggested that lithium may also have a neuroprotective role. [ Lithium is not associated with a significant reduction in renal function in most patients, and the risk of end-stage renal failure is low. [ [ Furthermore, recognizing that patients with bipolar affective disorder are at risk for suicide, lithium may also have some anti-suicidal action. A report from Lewitka and Bauer suggest that lithium may be an option for patients with affective disorders who are at risk for suicide. However, they caution that lithium is still a medication that requires careful assessment and monitoring. Patient adherence is essential. [ 
         Lithium carbonate (Lithobid) Lithium is considered a first-line agent for long-term prophylaxis in bipolar illness, especially for classic bipolar disorder with euphoric mania. It also can be used to treat acute mania, although it cannot be titrated up to an effective level as quickly as valproate can. Evidence suggests that lithium, unlike any other mood stabilizer, may have a specific antisuicide effect. Monitoring blood levels is critical with this medication. Serum levels should be determined twice weekly during the acute phase, and until the serum level and clinical condition of the patient has been stabilized. 
       Anticonvulsants 
         Class Summary Anticonvulsants have been effective in preventing mood swings associated with bipolar disorder, especially in those patients known as rapid cyclers. For the depressed phase, mood stabilizers, such as lithium and lamotrigine, are preferred, because antidepressants may propel a patient into a manic episode or exacerbate irritability in mixed-symptom mania. Gabapentin, although not a mood stabilizer, also may have anxiolytic properties.The most widely used anticonvulsants have been carbamazepine, valproate, and lamotrigine. More recently, topiramate and oxcarbazepine also are being tried. Note that the Department of Veterans Affairs/Department of Defense (VA/DoD) do not recommend lamotrigine, topiramate, and gabapentin in patients with mania or mixed episodes. [ 
         Carbamazepine (Equetro) Carbamazepine is effective in patients who have not had a clinical response to lithium therapy and who have rapid-cycling bipolar disorder. Its efficacy is not well established for long-term use; therefore, periodically reevaluate the long-term risks and benefits of carbamazepine for individual patients. This drug can also act to inhibit seizures induced through the kindling effect, which is thought to occur by way of repeated limbic stimulation.  
         Valproate sodium, valproic acid, divalproex sodium (Depakene, Depakote, Depakote ER, Depacon, Stavzor) Valproate has proven effectiveness in treating and preventing mania. It is classified as a mood stabilizer and can be used alone or in combination with lithium. This agent is useful in treating patients with rapid-cycling bipolar disorders and has been used to treat aggressive or behavioral disorders. A combination of valproic acid and valproate has been effective in treating persons in manic phase, with a success rate of 49%.  
         Lamotrigine (Lamictal, Lamictal ODT, Lamictal XR) Lamotrigine is an anticonvulsant that appears to be effective in the treatment of the depressed phase in bipolar disorders. It is used for the maintenance treatment of bipolar I disorder to delay the time to occurrence of mood episodes (depression, mania, hypomania, mixed episodes) in adults treated for acute mood episodes with standard therapy.  
         Topiramate (Topamax) Topiramate has an off-label indication for the treatment of bipolar disease. In a small retrospective review, marked improvement occurred in 62% of patients when topiramate was added to their current regimen. [ 
       Antipsychotics, 2nd Generation 
         Class Summary Second-generation, or atypical, antipsychotics are increasingly being used for treatment of both acute mania and mood stabilization in patients with bipolar I disease.  
         Asenapine (Saphris) Asenapine is indicated as monotherapy for the acute treatment of manic or mixed episodes that are associated with bipolar I disorder. It is also indicated as adjunctive therapy with lithium or valproate for the acute treatment of manic or mixed episodes associated with bipolar I disease. The efficacy of asenapine is thought to be mediated through a combination of antagonist activity at dopamine 2 and serotonin (5-HT2) receptors.  
         Ziprasidone (Geodon) Ziprasidone is approved for the treatment of acute or mixed episodes that are associated with bipolar disorder. It can be used as maintenance treatment or as an adjunct to lithium or valproate.  
         Quetiapine (Seroquel, Seroquel XR) Quetiapine is indicated for acute treatment of manic (immediate release and extended release [XR]) or mixed (XR) episodes that are associated with bipolar I disorder. It can be used as monotherapy or adjunctively with agents such as lithium or divalproex.  
         Risperidone (Risperdal, Risperdal Consta, Risperdal M-Tab) Risperidone is indicated for short-term treatment of acute manic or mixed episodes that are associated with bipolar I disorder. It can be used alone or in combination with lithium or valproate. Risperidone can be used in adults and adolescents aged 10-17 years with bipolar I disorder.  
         Aripiprazole (Abilify, Abilify Discmelt) Aripiprazole is indicated for the acute and maintenance treatment of manic or mixed episodes associated with bipolar I disorder. It can be used alone or in combination with lithium or valproate.  
         Olanzapine (Zyprexa, Zyprexa Zydis) Olanzapine is used for the acute and maintenance treatment of manic or mixed episodes associated with bipolar I disorder. It can be used alone or in combination with lithium or valproate. Olanzapine can be used in adults and adolescents aged 13-17 years with bipolar I disorder.  
         Olanzapine and fluoxetine (Symbyax) The drug combination includes olanzapine, a second-generation antipsychotic, and fluoxetine, a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor. This drug is indicated for the acute treatment of depressive episodes associated with bipolar I disorder in adults. The clinical effects of this agent have not been studied in patients younger than 18 years.  
         Clozapine (Clozaril, FazaClo ODT) Clozapine has an off-label indication for treatment of acute manic episodes associated with bipolar disorder and treatment of refractory bipolar mania. This agent demonstrates weak D2 receptor and D1 receptor blocking activity. Clozapine also acts as an antagonist at adrenergic, cholinergic, histaminergic, and serotonergic receptors.  
         Paliperidone (Invega) Paliperidone may be used for refractory, moderate to severe mania alone or in combination with lithium or valproate. This agent is typically reserved for patients who decline electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) and who do not respond to medication combinations involving lithium or valproate plus aripiprazole, haloperidol, or another first-generation antipsychotic.  
       Antipsychotics, 1st Generation 
         Class Summary First-generation antipsychotics, also known as conventional or typical antipsychotics, are efficacious for treating both psychotic and nonpsychotic manic and mixed episodes, as well as hypomania. These agents are strong dopamine D2 antagonists. However, each drug in this class has various effects on other receptors, such as 5-HT2 serotonin, alpha1, histaminic, and muscarinic receptors. 
         Loxapine inhaled (Adasuve) The mechanism of action for loxapine is unknown, but it is theorized to antagonize central dopamine D2 and serotonin 5-HT2a receptors. The inhaled dosage form is indicated for acute treatment of agitation associated with schizophrenia or bipolar I disorder in adults.  
         Haloperidol (Haldol) Haloperidol is used for the acute treatment of mania or mixed episodes in patients with bipolar disorder. It can be used alone or in combination with lithium or valproate in an adult patient. Haloperidol blocks postsynaptic dopamine receptors (D2) in the mesolimbic system and increases dopamine turnover by blockade of the D2 somatodendritic autoreceptor  
       Antipsychotics, Phenothiazine 
         Class Summary Phenothiazine antipsychotics, which are classified as first-generation antipsychotics, are efficacious for treating both psychotic and nonpsychotic manic and mixed episodes, as well as hypomania. 
         Chlorpromazine (Thorazine) Chlorpromazine is used to treat manic and mixed episodes in patients with bipolar I disorder. It can be used alone or in combination with lithium or valproate. Chlorpromazine blocks postsynaptic dopamine receptors (D2) in the mesolimbic system and increases dopamine turnover by blockade of the D2 somatodendritic autoreceptor  
       Antiparkinson Agents, Dopamine Agonists 
         Class Summary Dopamine agonists are non-ergot agents that bind to D2 and D3 dopamine receptors in the striatum and substantia nigra. 
         Pramipexole (Mirapex, Mirapex ER) Pramipexole is used as add-on therapy for patients whose condition is refractory to combination therapy and have bipolar depression. Pramipexole is a non-ergot, full dopamine agonist that binds to D2 and D3 dopamine receptors.  
     
       Author 
         Stephen Soreff, MD President of Education Initiatives, Nottingham, NH; Faculty, Boston University, Boston, MA and Daniel Webster College, Nashua, NH Stephen Soreff, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  ACMHA: The College for Behavioral Health Leadership Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Coauthor(s) 
         Lynne Alison McInnes, MD, MS Associate Clinical Professor of Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, School of Medicine Lynne Alison McInnes, MD, MS is a member of the following medical societies:  Alpha Omega Alpha American Psychiatric Association American Society of Human Genetics Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Chief Editor 
         Iqbal Ahmed, MBBS, FRCPsych (UK) Faculty, Department of Psychiatry, Tripler Army Medical Center; Clinical Professor of Psychiatry, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences; Clinical Professor of Psychiatry, Clinical Professor of Geriatric Medicine, University of Hawaii, John A Burns School of Medicine Iqbal Ahmed, MBBS, FRCPsych (UK) is a member of the following medical societies:  Academy of Psychosomatic Medicine American Neuropsychiatric Association American Society of Clinical Psychopharmacology American Association for Geriatric Psychiatry American Psychiatric Association Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
     Acknowledgements 
       Francisco Talavera, PharmD, PhD Disclosure: Medscape Salary Employment  
     
       Bowden C, Singh V. Long-term management of bipolar disorder. Available at  http://www.medscape.com/viewprogram/2686 
       American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association; 2013.  
       69. Management of Bipolar Disorder Working Group. VA/DoD clinical practice guideline for management of bipolar disorder in adults. Washington, DC: Department of Veterans Affairs, Department of Defense; 2010. Available at  http://guideline.gov/content.aspx?id=16314 
       Zhang D,  Cheng L,  Qian Y,  Alliey-Rodriguez N,  Kelsoe JR,  Greenwood T, et al. Singleton deletions throughout the genome increase risk of bipolar disorder.  Mol Psychiatry [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Price AL, Marzani-Nissen GR. Bipolar disorders: a review.  Am Fam Physician [Medline] 
       Ketter TA. Diagnostic features, prevalence, and impact of bipolar disorder.  J Clin Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Edvardsen J,  Torgersen S,  Røysamb E,  Lygren S,  Skre I,  Onstad S, et al. Heritability of bipolar spectrum disorders. Unity or heterogeneity?.  J Affect Disord [Medline] 
       Berrettini WH,  Ferraro TN,  Goldin LR,  Weeks DE,  Detera-Wadleigh S,  Nurnberger JI Jr, et al. Chromosome 18 DNA markers and manic-depressive illness: evidence for a susceptibility gene.  Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Reich T, Clayton PJ, Winokur G. Family history studies: V. The genetics of mania.  Am J Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Lin PI,  McInnis MG,  Potash JB,  Willour VL,  Mackinnon DF,  Miao K, et al. Assessment of the effect of age at onset on linkage to bipolar disorder: evidence on chromosomes 18p and 21q.  Am J Hum Genet [Medline] [Full Text] 
       McQuillin A,  Bass NJ,  Kalsi G,  Lawrence J,  Puri V,  Choudhury K, et al. Fine mapping of a susceptibility locus for bipolar and genetically related unipolar affective disorders, to a region containing the C21ORF29 and TRPM2 genes on chromosome 21q22.3.  Mol Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Ekholm JM,  Kieseppä T,  Hiekkalinna T,  Partonen T,  Paunio T,  Perola M, et al. Evidence of susceptibility loci on 4q32 and 16p12 for bipolar disorder.  Hum Mol Genet [Medline] 
       Abou Jamra R,  Fuerst R,  Kaneva R,  Orozco Diaz G,  Rivas F,  Mayoral F, et al. The first genomewide interaction and locus-heterogeneity linkage scan in bipolar affective disorder: strong evidence of epistatic effects between loci on chromosomes 2q and 6q.  Am J Hum Genet [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Kelsoe JR,  Spence MA,  Loetscher E,  Foguet M,  Sadovnick AD,  Remick RA, et al. A genome survey indicates a possible susceptibility locus for bipolar disorder on chromosome 22.  Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Kakiuchi C,  Iwamoto K,  Ishiwata M,  Bundo M,  Kasahara T,  Kusumi I, et al. Impaired feedback regulation of XBP1 as a genetic risk factor for bipolar disorder.  Nat Genet [Medline] 
       Ferreira MA,  O'Donovan MC,  Meng YA,  Jones IR,  Ruderfer DM,  Jones L, et al. Collaborative genome-wide association analysis supports a role for ANK3 and CACNA1C in bipolar disorder.  Nat Genet [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Large-scale genome-wide association analysis of bipolar disorder identifies a new susceptibility locus near ODZ4.  Nat Genet [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Baum AE,  Akula N,  Cabanero M,  Cardona I,  Corona W,  Klemens B, et al. A genome-wide association study implicates diacylglycerol kinase eta (DGKH) and several other genes in the etiology of bipolar disorder.  Mol Psychiatry [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Genome-wide association study of 14,000 cases of seven common diseases and 3,000 shared controls.  Nature [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Sklar P,  Smoller JW,  Fan J,  Ferreira MA,  Perlis RH,  Chambert K, et al. Whole-genome association study of bipolar disorder.  Mol Psychiatry [Medline] [Full Text] 
       McQuillin A, Rizig M, Gurling HM. A microarray gene expression study of the molecular pharmacology of lithium carbonate on mouse brain mRNA to understand the neurobiology of mood stabilization and treatment of bipolar affective disorder.  Pharmacogenet Genomics [Medline] 
       National Institutes of Health.NIH News. Schizophrenia and bipolar disorder share genetic roots. Available at  http://www.nih.gov/news/health/jul2009/nimh-01.htm 
       Identification of risk loci with shared effects on five major psychiatric disorders: a genome-wide analysis.  Lancet [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Post RM, Speer AM, Hough CJ, Xing G. Neurobiology of bipolar illness: implications for future study and therapeutics.  Ann Clin Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Roybal K,  Theobold D,  Graham A,  DiNieri JA,  Russo SJ,  Krishnan V, et al. Mania-like behavior induced by disruption of CLOCK.  Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Coyle JT. What can a clock mutation in mice tell us about bipolar disorder?.  Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Bearden CE, Freimer NB. Endophenotypes for psychiatric disorders: ready for primetime?.  Trends Genet [Medline] 
       American College of Neuropsychopharmacology. American College of Neuropsychopharmacology 2010 annual meeting abstracts. December 5-9, 2010; Miami Beach, Fla.  
       Potash JB,  Toolan J,  Steele J,  Miller EB,  Pearl J,  Zandi PP, et al. The bipolar disorder phenome database: a resource for genetic studies.  Am J Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Cichon S,  Mühleisen TW,  Degenhardt FA,  Mattheisen M,  Miró X,  Strohmaier J, et al. Genome-wide association study identifies genetic variation in neurocan as a susceptibility factor for bipolar disorder.  Am J Hum Genet [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Graae L, Karlsson R, Paddock S. Significant association of estrogen receptor binding site variation with bipolar disorder in females.  PLoS One [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Grozeva D,  Kirov G,  Ivanov D,  Jones IR,  Jones L,  Green EK, et al. Rare copy number variants: a point of rarity in genetic risk for bipolar disorder and schizophrenia.  Arch Gen Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Aston C, Jiang L, Sokolov BP. Transcriptional profiling reveals evidence for signaling and oligodendroglial abnormalities in the temporal cortex from patients with major depressive disorder.  Mol Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Davis KL, Haroutunian V. Global expression-profiling studies and oligodendrocyte dysfunction in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder.  Lancet [Medline] 
       Prabakaran S,  Swatton JE,  Ryan MM,  Huffaker SJ,  Huang JT,  Griffin JL, et al. Mitochondrial dysfunction in schizophrenia: evidence for compromised brain metabolism and oxidative stress.  Mol Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Tkachev D,  Mimmack ML,  Ryan MM,  Wayland M,  Freeman T,  Jones PB, et al. Oligodendrocyte dysfunction in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder.  Lancet [Medline] 
       Adler CM,  Holland SK,  Schmithorst V,  Wilke M,  Weiss KL,  Pan H, et al. Abnormal frontal white matter tracts in bipolar disorder: a diffusion tensor imaging study.  Bipolar Disord [Medline] 
       Adler CM,  Adams J,  DelBello MP,  Holland SK,  Schmithorst V,  Levine A, et al. Evidence of white matter pathology in bipolar disorder adolescents experiencing their first episode of mania: a diffusion tensor imaging study.  Am J Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Bartzokis G. Neuroglialpharmacology: myelination as a shared mechanism of action of psychotropic treatments.  Neuropharmacology [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Chen G,  Zeng WZ,  Yuan PX,  Huang LD,  Jiang YM,  Zhao ZH, et al. The mood-stabilizing agents lithium and valproate robustly increase the levels of the neuroprotective protein bcl-2 in the CNS.  J Neurochem [Medline] 
       Konradi C,  Zimmerman EI,  Yang CK,  Lohmann KM,  Gresch P,  Pantazopoulos H, et al. Hippocampal interneurons in bipolar disorder.  Arch Gen Psychiatry [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Mathew SJ, Manji HK, Charney DS. Novel drugs and therapeutic targets for severe mood disorders. Neuropsychopharmacology. Aug 2008;33(9):2300.  
       The HUGE project; research program on genes, environment, and health. multi-ethnic genome wide association study of bipolar disorder. Kaiser Permanente.  [Full Text] 
       Axelson D,  Goldstein B,  Goldstein T,  Monk K,  Yu H,  Hickey MB, et al. Diagnostic Precursors to Bipolar Disorder in Offspring of Parents With Bipolar Disorder: A Longitudinal Study.  Am J Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Frey BN,  Andreazza AC,  Houenou J,  Jamain S,  Goldstein BI,  Frye MA, et al. Biomarkers in bipolar disorder: a positional paper from the International Society for Bipolar Disorders Biomarkers Task Force.  Aust N Z J Psychiatry [Medline] 
       The Columbia Bipolar Genetic Study. Bipolar disorder and genetics. Available at  http://bipolar.hs.columbia.edu/disgenet.htm 
       Cardno AG, Rijsdijk FV, Sham PC, Murray RM, McGuffin P. A twin study of genetic relationships between psychotic symptoms.  Am J Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Berrettini WH. Are schizophrenic and bipolar disorders related? A review of family and molecular studies.  Biol Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Hashimoto K, Sawa A, Iyo M. Increased levels of glutamate in brains from patients with mood disorders.  Biol Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Houenou J,  Frommberger J,  Carde S,  Glasbrenner M,  Diener C,  Leboyer M, et al. Neuroimaging-based markers of bipolar disorder: evidence from two meta-analyses.  J Affect Disord [Medline] 
       Barnett JH,  Huang J,  Perlis RH,  Young MM,  Rosenbaum JF,  Nierenberg AA, et al. Personality and bipolar disorder: dissecting state and trait associations between mood and personality.  Psychol Med [Medline] 
       Chaudron LH, Pies RW. The relationship between postpartum psychosis and bipolar disorder: a review.  J Clin Psychiatry [Medline] 
       [Guideline] Hirschfeld RMA. Guideline Watch: Practice Guideline for the Treatment of Patients With Bipolar Disorder. Review and Synthesis of Available Evidence. Somatic Treatments of Acute Manic and Mixed Episodes. 2nd ed. Arlington, Va: American Psychiatric Association.  [Full Text] 
       Calabrese JR. Overview of patient care issues and treatment in bipolar spectrum and bipolar II disorder.  J Clin Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Merikangas KR, Jin R, He J-P, et al. Prevalence and correlates of bipolar spectrum disorder in the World Mental Health Survey Initiative. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2011;68(3):241-251.  
       Yutzy SH, Woofter CR, Abbott CC, Melhem IM, Parish BS. The increasing frequency of mania and bipolar disorder: causes and potential negative impacts.  J Nerv Ment Dis [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Diflorio A, Jones I. Is sex important? Gender differences in bipolar disorder.  Int Rev Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Hoang U, Stewart R, Goldacre MJ. Mortality after hospital discharge for people with schizophrenia or bipolar disorder: retrospective study of linked English hospital episode statistics, 1999-2006.  BMJ [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Dogan S, Sabanciogullari S. The effects of patient education in lithium therapy on quality of life and compliance.  Arch Psychiatr Nurs [Medline] 
       National Institute of Mental Health. A story of bipolar disorder (manic-depressive illness).  [Full Text] 
       Webb M. The years of silence are past: my father’s life with bipolar disorder. Am J Psychiatry. Dec 1 2003;160(12):2257.  
       Frye MA. Diagnostic dilemmas and clinical correlates of mixed states in bipolar disorder.  J Clin Psychiatry [Medline] 
       American Psychiatric Association. Mixed features specifier. Available at  http://www.dsm5.org/ProposedRevisions/Pages/proposedrevision.aspx?rid=483 
       Swann AC,  Lafer B,  Perugi G,  Frye MA,  Bauer M,  Bahk WM, et al. Bipolar mixed states: an international society for bipolar disorders task force report of symptom structure, course of illness, and diagnosis.  Am J Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Bega S, Schaffer A, Goldstein B, Levitt A. Differentiating between Bipolar Disorder types I and II: results from the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions (NESARC).  J Affect Disord [Medline] 
       Dubovsky S. The real risk for suicide in mental disorders. Medscape News Today. Available at  http://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/754885 
       Bellivier F,  Yon L,  Luquiens A,  Azorin JM,  Bertsch J,  Gerard S, et al. Suicidal attempts in bipolar disorder: results from an observational study (EMBLEM).  Bipolar Disord [Medline] 
       Volavka J. Violence in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder.  Psychiatr Danub [Medline] 
       Fagiolini A. Medical monitoring in patients with bipolar disorder: a review of data.  J Clin Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Keck PE Jr. Evaluating treatment decisions in bipolar depression. Available at  http://www.medscape.com/viewprogram/2571 
       Krishna VN,  Thunga R,  Unnikrishnan B,  Kanchan T,  Bukelo MJ,  Mehta RK, et al. Association between bipolar affective disorder and thyroid dysfunction.  Asian J Psychiatr [Medline] 
       Kenneson A, Funderburk JS, Maisto SA. Risk factors for secondary substance use disorders in people with childhood and adolescent-onset bipolar disorder: opportunities for prevention.  Compr Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Tohen M,  Zarate CA Jr,  Hennen J,  Khalsa HM,  Strakowski SM,  Gebre-Medhin P, et al. The McLean-Harvard First-Episode Mania Study: prediction of recovery and first recurrence.  Am J Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Berk M,  Brnabic A,  Dodd S,  Kelin K,  Tohen M,  Malhi GS, et al. Does stage of illness impact treatment response in bipolar disorder? Empirical treatment data and their implication for the staging model and early intervention.  Bipolar Disord [Medline] 
       Goldstein TR,  Ha W,  Axelson DA,  Goldstein BI,  Liao F,  Gill MK, et al. Predictors of prospectively examined suicide attempts among youth with bipolar disorder.  Arch Gen Psychiatry [Medline] [Full Text] 
       McIntyre RS,  Soczynska JK,  Beyer JL,  Woldeyohannes HO,  Law CW,  Miranda A, et al. Medical comorbidity in bipolar disorder: re-prioritizing unmet needs.  Curr Opin Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Bradford DW, Kim MM, Braxton LE, Marx CE, Butterfield M, Elbogen EB. Access to medical care among persons with psychotic and major affective disorders.  Psychiatr Serv [Medline] 
       Woltmann E, Grogan-Kaylor A, Perron B, Georges H, Kilbourne AM, Bauer MS. Comparative effectiveness of collaborative chronic care models for mental health conditions across primary, specialty, and behavioral health care settings: systematic review and meta-analysis.  Am J Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Gutman DA, Nemeroff C. Medscape Education. Atypical antipsychotics in bipolar disorder. Available at  http://www.medscape.org/viewarticle/554128 
       Bauer M, Ritter P, Grunze H, Pfennig A. Treatment options for acute depression in bipolar disorder.  Bipolar Disord [Medline] 
       Post RM,  Leverich GS,  Altshuler LL,  Frye MA,  Suppes T,  McElroy SL, et al. Relationship of prior antidepressant exposure to long-term prospective outcome in bipolar I disorder outpatients.  J Clin Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Kwentus J,  Riesenberg RA,  Marandi M,  Manning RA,  Allen MH,  Fishman RS, et al. Rapid acute treatment of agitation in patients with bipolar I disorder: a multicenter, randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial with inhaled loxapine.  Bipolar Disord [Medline] 
       Lesem MD,  Tran-Johnson TK,  Riesenberg RA,  Feifel D,  Allen MH,  Fishman R, et al. Rapid acute treatment of agitation in individuals with schizophrenia: multicentre, randomised, placebo-controlled study of inhaled loxapine.  Br J Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Bauer M, Alda M, Priller J, Young LT. Implications of the neuroprotective effects of lithium for the treatment of bipolar and neurodegenerative disorders.  Pharmacopsychiatry [Medline] 
       McKnight RF, Adida M, Budge K, Stockton S, Goodwin GM, Geddes JR. Lithium toxicity profile: a systematic review and meta-analysis.  Lancet [Medline] 
       Ansari A, Osser DN. The psychopharmacology algorithm project at the Harvard South Shore Program: an update on bipolar depression.  Harv Rev Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Diazgranados N,  Ibrahim L,  Brutsche NE,  Newberg A,  Kronstein P,  Khalife S, et al. A randomized add-on trial of an N-methyl-D-aspartate antagonist in treatment-resistant bipolar depression.  Arch Gen Psychiatry [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Sidor MM, Macqueen GM. Antidepressants for the acute treatment of bipolar depression: a systematic review and meta-analysis.  J Clin Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Geddes JR,  Goodwin GM,  Rendell J,  Azorin JM,  Cipriani A,  Ostacher MJ, et al. Lithium plus valproate combination therapy versus monotherapy for relapse prevention in bipolar I disorder (BALANCE): a randomised open-label trial.  Lancet [Medline] 
       Kessing LV, Hellmund G, Geddes JR, Goodwin GM, Andersen PK. Valproate v. lithium in the treatment of bipolar disorder in clinical practice: observational nationwide register-based cohort study.  Br J Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Swartz HA, Thase ME. Pharmacotherapy for the treatment of acute bipolar II depression: current evidence.  J Clin Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Smith LA, Cornelius V, Warnock A, Bell A, Young AH. Effectiveness of mood stabilizers and antipsychotics in the maintenance phase of bipolar disorder: a systematic review of randomized controlled trials.  Bipolar Disord [Medline] 
       Popovic D, Reinares M, Goikolea JM, Bonnin CM, Gonzalez-Pinto A, Vieta E. Polarity index of pharmacological agents used for maintenance treatment of bipolar disorder.  Eur Neuropsychopharmacol [Medline] 
       Pappadopulos E, Newcomer JW, Kolluri S. Changes in weight, plasma lipids, and glucose in adults treated with ziprasidone: a comprehensive analysis of pfizer-initiated clinical trials.  J Clin Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Cipriani A,  Barbui C,  Salanti G,  Rendell J,  Brown R,  Stockton S, et al. Comparative efficacy and acceptability of antimanic drugs in acute mania: a multiple-treatments meta-analysis.  Lancet [Medline] 
       Tohen M,  Goldberg JF,  Gonzalez-Pinto Arrillaga AM,  Azorin JM,  Vieta E,  Hardy-Bayle MC, et al. A 12-week, double-blind comparison of olanzapine vs haloperidol in the treatment of acute mania.  Arch Gen Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Tohen M,  Baker RW,  Altshuler LL,  Zarate CA,  Suppes T,  Ketter TA, et al. Olanzapine versus divalproex in the treatment of acute mania.  Am J Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Tohen M,  Chengappa KN,  Suppes T,  Zarate CA Jr,  Calabrese JR,  Bowden CL, et al. Efficacy of olanzapine in combination with valproate or lithium in the treatment of mania in patients partially nonresponsive to valproate or lithium monotherapy.  Arch Gen Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Sachs GS, Grossman F, Ghaemi SN, Okamoto A, Bowden CL. Combination of a mood stabilizer with risperidone or haloperidol for treatment of acute mania: a double-blind, placebo-controlled comparison of efficacy and safety.  Am J Psychiatry [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Yatham LN, Grossman F, Augustyns I, Vieta E, Ravindran A. Mood stabilisers plus risperidone or placebo in the treatment of acute mania. International, double-blind, randomised controlled trial.  Br J Psychiatry [Medline] 
       [Guideline] Hirschfeld RMA, Bowden CL, Gitlin MJ, et al, for the Work Group on Bipolar Disorder. Practice guideline for the treatment of patients with bipolar disorder, second edition. American Psychiatric Association. Available at  http://www.psychiatryonline.com/pracGuide/PracticePDFs/Bipolar2e_Inactivated_04-16-09.pdf 
       Hamrin V, Iennaco JD. Psychopharmacology of pediatric bipolar disorder.  Expert Rev Neurother [Medline] 
       Geller B,  Luby JL,  Joshi P,  Wagner KD,  Emslie G,  Walkup JT, et al. A randomized controlled trial of risperidone, lithium, or divalproex sodium for initial treatment of bipolar I disorder, manic or mixed phase, in children and adolescents.  Arch Gen Psychiatry [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Jeffrey S. FDA warns of aseptic meningitis risk with lamotrigine. FDA warns of aseptic meningitis risk with lamotrigine. Available at  http://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/726845 
       Brooks JO 3rd, Goldberg JF, Ketter TA, et al. Safety and tolerability associated with second-generation antipsychotic polytherapy in bipolar disorder: findings from the Systematic Treatment Enhancement Program for Bipolar Disorder. J Clin Psychiatry. Feb 2011;72(2):240-7.  [Medline] 
       Mukherjee S, Sackeim HA, Schnur DB. Electroconvulsive therapy of acute manic episodes: a review of 50 years' experience.  Am J Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Sarris J, Mischoulon D, Schweiter I. Omega-3 for bipolar disorder: meta-analyses of use in mania and bipolar depression. J Clin Psychiatry. 2011;Online ahead of print.  
       Hong CJ, Huo SJ, Yen FC, Tung CL, Pan GM, Tsai SJ. Association study of a brain-derived neurotrophic-factor genetic polymorphism and mood disorders, age of onset and suicidal behavior.  Neuropsychobiology [Medline] 
       Ilgen MA,  Bohnert AS,  Ignacio RV,  McCarthy JF,  Valenstein MM,  Kim HM, et al. Psychiatric diagnoses and risk of suicide in veterans.  Arch Gen Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Bellivier F,  Yon L,  Luquiens A,  Azorin JM,  Bertsch J,  Gerard S, et al. Suicidal attempts in bipolar disorder: results from an observational study (EMBLEM).  Bipolar Disord [Medline] 
       Fazel S, Lichtenstein P, Grann M, Goodwin GM, Långström N. Bipolar disorder and violent crime: new evidence from population-based longitudinal studies and systematic review.  Arch Gen Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Saarni SI, Viertiö S, Perälä J, Koskinen S, Lönnqvist J, Suvisaari J. Quality of life of people with schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and other psychotic disorders.  Br J Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Fiedorowicz JG, Endicott J, Leon AC, Solomon DA, Keller MB, Coryell WH. Subthreshold hypomanic symptoms in progression from unipolar major depression to bipolar disorder.  Am J Psychiatry [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Leibenluft E. Severe mood dysregulation, irritability, and the diagnostic boundaries of bipolar disorder in youths.  Am J Psychiatry [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Marcotte D. Use of topiramate, a new anti-epileptic as a mood stabilizer.  J Affect Disord [Medline] 
       American Psychiatric Association. Bipolar and related disorders. Available at  http://www.dsm5.org/ProposedRevision/Pages/BipolarandRelatedDisorders.aspx 
       American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, Text Revision, DSM-IV-TR. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association; 2000.  
       American Psychiatric Association. DSM-5: the future of psychiatric diagnosis. Available at  http://www.dsm5.org/Pages/Default.aspx 
       Angst J,  Azorin JM,  Bowden CL,  Perugi G,  Vieta E,  Gamma A, et al. Prevalence and characteristics of undiagnosed bipolar disorders in patients with a major depressive episode: the BRIDGE study.  Arch Gen Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Angst J,  Gamma A,  Bowden CL,  Azorin JM,  Perugi G,  Vieta E, et al. Diagnostic criteria for bipolarity based on an international sample of 5,635 patients with DSM-IV major depressive episodes.  Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci [Medline] 
       Lepping P, Menkes DB. Abuse of dosulepin to induce mania.  Addiction [Medline] 
       Lewitzka, U. and Bauer, M. What Role Does (Should) Lithium Play in Suicide Treatment/Prevention?. Psychiatric Times. Available at  http://www.psychiatrictimes.com/special-reports/what-role-does-should-lithium-play-in-suicide-treatment-prevention 
       Schöttle D, Huber CG, Bock T, Meyer TD. Psychotherapy for bipolar disorder: a review of the most recent studies.  Curr Opin Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Wolkenstein L, Bruchmüller K, Schmid P, Meyer TD. Misdiagnosing bipolar disorder--do clinicians show heuristic biases?.  J Affect Disord [Medline]

Article 24:

   
     Phobic Disorders 
       Phobic Disorders: Practice Essentials, Background, Pathophysiology Phobic Disorders Clinical Presentation: History, Physical Examination, Complications Phobic Disorders Differential Diagnoses Phobic Disorders Workup: Approach Considerations Phobic Disorders Treatment & Management: Approach Considerations, Pharmacotherapy, Psychotherapy Phobic Disorders Medication: Antidepressants, SSRIs, Antidepressants, SNRIs, Benzodiazepines, Antianxiety Agents, Antihypertensive Agents, Antidepressants, TCAs, Antidepressants, MAO Inhibitors, Anticonvulsants 
       Phobic Disorders: Practice Essentials, Background, Pathophysiology Phobic Disorders Clinical Presentation: History, Physical Examination, Complications Phobic Disorders Differential Diagnoses Phobic Disorders Workup: Approach Considerations Phobic Disorders Treatment & Management: Approach Considerations, Pharmacotherapy, Psychotherapy Phobic Disorders Medication: Antidepressants, SSRIs, Antidepressants, SNRIs, Benzodiazepines, Antianxiety Agents, Antihypertensive Agents, Antidepressants, TCAs, Antidepressants, MAO Inhibitors, Anticonvulsants 
       Overview
 Practice Essentials Background Pathophysiology Etiology Epidemiology Prognosis Patient Education Presentation
 History Physical Examination Complications Differential Diagnoses
 Workup
 Approach Considerations Treatment
 Approach Considerations Pharmacotherapy Psychotherapy Diet and Activity Prevention Consultations Long-Term Monitoring Medication
 
       Phobic Disorders Overview Phobic Disorders Clinical Presentation Phobic Disorders Differential Diagnoses Phobic Disorders Workup Phobic Disorders Treatment Phobic Disorders Medication 288016-overview Jul 30, 2014 2015-06-20-01:28 0 Psychiatry 2002 Diseases & Conditions Condition 
       1 2 content 288016 502 1440 12 f41_f40_f33 
     Jun 04, 2015 
       condition Diseases & Conditions 
       psychiatry Psychiatry 
       psychiatry_adult Adult phobic disorders, phobias, simple phobia, specific phobia, anxiety disorders, social phobia, social anxiety disorder, agoraphobia, panic, phobic neurosis, phobic reaction, fear, mood disorders A phobia is defined as an irrational fear that produces a conscious avoidance of the feared subject, activity, or situation. The affected person usually recognizes that the reaction is excessive. 0 Phobic Disorders 
     Overview 
       Practice Essentials 
         Collectively, phobic disorders (including social anxiety disorder [social phobia], specific phobia, and agoraphobia) are the most common forms of psychiatric illness, surpassing the rates of mood disorders and substance abuse. Severity can range from mild and unobtrusive to severe and can result in incapacity to work, travel, or interact with others.  
         Signs and symptoms In obtaining a history from a patient with symptoms of a phobic disorder, the physician should inquire about the following: 
           
             Other anxiety disorders 
             Depression 
             Suicidal ideation 
             Substance-related disorders 
             Caffeine intake 
             Alcohol intake 
             Difficulties in social situations (in suspected social anxiety disorder) 
             Irrational and out-of-proportion fear or avoidance of particular objects or situations (in suspected specific phobia) 
             Intense anxiety reactions with exposure to specific situations (in suspected agoraphobia) Anxiety is the most common feature in phobic disorders. Manifestations include the following: 
           
             Elevated heart rate 
             Elevated blood pressure 
             Tremor 
             Palpitations 
             Diarrhea 
             Sweating 
             Dyspnea 
             Paresthesias 
             Dizziness Because anxiety manifests with a number of physical symptoms, any patient who presents with a de novo complaint of physical symptoms suggestive of an anxiety disorder should undergo a physical examination to help rule out medical conditions that might present with anxietylike symptoms.  For a patient with a suspected phobic disorder, the mental status examination should include assessment of the following: 
           
             Appearance 
             Behavior 
             Ability to cooperate with the examination 
             level of activity 
             Speech 
             Mood and affect 
             Thought processes and content 
             Insight 
             Judgment Findings in a patient with a phobic disorder may include the following: 
           
             Neurovegetative signs 
             Anxious affect upon abrupt confrontation with the object of the phobia 
             Anxious mood 
             Ability to identify the reason for the anxiety 
             Thought content that is significant for phobic ideation (unrealistic and out-of-proportion fears) 
             Preserved insight (usually; may be impaired, especially during exposure) 
             If comorbid conditions are present, possible suicidal or homicidal ideation See  Presentation 
         Diagnosis To rule out anxiety secondary to medical conditions, the following tests may be helpful: 
           
             Thyroid function tests 
             Fasting glucose 
             Calcium 
             24-hour urine for 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) 
             Drug screen 
             Electrocardiography (ECG) and cardiac enzyme tests 
             Electroencephalography (EEG) - Seizure disorders (these conditions may mimic anxiety) Where medical illness, such as a seizure disorder, is suspected, the following Imaging studies may be considered: 
           
             Computed tomography (CT) of the head 
             Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
             Echocardiography 
             Positron emission tomography (PET) See  Workup f 
         Management Treatment of phobic disorders usually consists of pharmacotherapy, psychotherapy, or some combination thereof. Pharmacotherapy for social anxiety disorder may include the following: 
           
             Paroxetine and sertraline (FDA-approved) 
             Venlafaxine (FDA-approved) 
             Escitalopram, fluoxetine, and fluvoxamine 
             Phenelzine 
             Moclobemide (not approved in the United States) 
             Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) 
             Beta-blockers (eg, propranolol) 
             Selected anticonvulsants (eg, gabapentin, pregabalin, valproic acid, topiramate, and tiagabine) No controlled studies have demonstrated the efficacy of psychopharmacologic intervention for specific phobias. As-needed administration of a short-acting benzodiazepine may be useful for temporary anxiety relief in specific situations.  Agents that may be considered for agoraphobia include the following: 
           
             SSRIs (eg, escitalopram, citalopram, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxetine, and sertraline), 
             Venlafaxine and reboxetine 
             Some TCAs (eg, clomipramine and imipramine) 
             Some benzodiazepines (eg, alprazolam, lorazepam, diazepam, and clonazepam) 
             Mirtazapine 
             Moclobemide Psychotherapeutic interventions that may be helpful for treating phobic disorders include the following: 
           
             Social anxiety disorder (social phobia) - Self-exposure monotherapy, computer-based exposure training, clinician-led exposure, or combination therapies (eg, self-exposure and cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT)/self-help manual)  
             Specific phobia - CBT-based approach, including gradual desensitization; relaxation and breathing control techniques; exposure therapy  
             Agoraphobia - Combination of exposure therapy, relaxation, and breathing retraining See  Treatment Medication 
       Background 
         A phobia is defined as an irrational fear that produces a conscious avoidance of the feared subject, activity, or situation. The affected person usually recognizes that the reaction is excessive.  Collectively, phobic disorders are the most common forms of psychiatric illness, surpassing the rates of mood disorders and substance abuse. Severity can range from mild and unobtrusive to severe and can result in incapacity to work, travel, or interact with others.  Treatment of phobic disorders usually consists of pharmacotherapy, psychotherapy, or some combination thereof. As a rule, a selected medication regimen should be continued for at least 6-12 months. If the symptoms have resolved and the patient is not experiencing excessive stress, the physician can gradually taper the patient off the medication. Psychotherapy usually helps make the transition away from medication more successful. 
         Diagnostic criteria (DSM-5) According to the American Psychiatric Association’s  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5) [ 
           
             Social anxiety disorder (social phobia) 
             Specific phobia - An overwhelming, persisting fear of an object or situation; it differs from other anxiety disorders in that the fear and anxiety is induced by the presence of the phobic situation or object  
             Agoraphobia - The fear of being alone in public places, particularly places from which a rapid exit would be difficult or help might not be available in the course of a panic attack or other embarrassing symptoms  
           Social anxiety disorder (social phobia) The specific  DSM-5 [ 
           
             Marked fear or anxiety about 1 or more social situations in which the individual might be scrutinized by others, such as social interactions (eg, having a conversation or meeting unfamiliar people), being observed (eg, eating or drinking), and performing in front of others (eg, giving a speech); in children, the anxiety may occur in peer settings and not just during interactions with adults  
             The individual fears acting in a way or showing anxiety symptoms that will be negatively evaluated (eg, will be humiliating or embarrassing, will lead to rejection, or will offend others)  
             The social situation almost always provokes immediate fear or anxiety; in children, anxiety may be expressed by crying, tantrums, freezing, clinging shrinking, or failing to speak in social situations  
             The social situations are actively avoided or endured with intense fear or anxiety 
             The fear or anxiety is out of proportion to the actual threat posed by the social situation and to the sociocultural context 
             The fear, anxiety, or avoidance persists, typically for 6 months or longer 
             The fear, anxiety or avoidance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning  
             The fear, anxiety or avoidance cannot be attributed to the physiologic effects of a substance (eg, a drug of abuse or medication) or another medical condition  
             The fear, anxiety or avoidance cannot be better explained by the symptoms of another mental disorder (eg, panic disorder, body dysmorphic disorder, or autism spectrum disorder)  
             If another medical condition (eg, Parkinson disease, obesity, or disfigurement caused by a burn or injury) is present, the fear, anxiety, or avoidance is clearly unrelated or is excessive  Performance-only subtype is specified when fear is restricted to speaking or performing in public. Individuals with performance-only social phobia do not fear or avoid nonperformance in generic social situations; their phobic reaction is typically restricted to professional performance (eg, musicians, dancers, performers, or athletes or public speaking). 
           Specific phobia The specific  DSM-5 [ 
           
             Marked fear or anxiety about a specific object or situation (eg, flying, heights, animals, receiving an injection, or seeing blood); in children, this fear or anxiety may be expressed by crying, tantrums, freezing or clinging  
             The phobic object or situation almost always provokes immediate fear or anxiety 
             The phobic object or situation is actively avoided or endured with intense fear or anxiety 
             The fear or anxiety is out of proportion to the actual danger posed by the specific object or situation and to the sociocultural context  
             The fear, anxiety, or avoidance persists, typically for 6 months or longer 
             The fear, anxiety or avoidance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning  
             The disturbance cannot be better explained by the symptoms of another mental disorder, including fear, anxiety, and avoidance of situations associated with paniclike symptoms or other incapacitating symptoms (as in agoraphobia); objects or situations related to obsessions (as in obsessive-compulsive disorder [OCD]); reminders of traumatic events (as in posttraumatic stress disorder [PTSD]); separation from home or attachment figures (as in separation anxiety disorder); or social situations (as in social anxiety disorder)  The following specifiers are used, according to the phobic stimulus present [ 
           
             Animal - Fear of dogs (cynophobia), cats (ailurophobia), bees (apiphobia), spiders (arachnophobia), snakes (ophidiophobia), or other animals  
             Natural environment - Fear of heights (acrophobia), water (hydrophobia), or thunderstorms (astraphobia) 
             Blood-injection-injury - Fear of needles or invasive medical procedures 
             Situational - Fear of flying, elevators, or enclosed spaces 
             Other - Fear of situations that may lead to choking or vomiting; in children, loud sounds or costumed characters Many individuals have multiple specific phobias. The average individual with specific phobia fears 3 objects or situations, and approximately 75% of individuals with specific phobia fear more than 1 situation or object. In such instances, multiple specific phobia diagnoses, each with its own diagnostic code reflecting the phobic stimulus, should be applied.  
           Agoraphobia The specific  DSM-5 [ 
           
             Marked fear or anxiety about at least 2 of the following 5 situations: (1) using public transportation (e.g. automobiles, buses, trains, ships, or planes), (2) being in open spaces (eg, parking lots, marketplaces, or bridges), (3) being in enclosed places (eg, shops, theaters, or cinemas), (4) standing in line or being in a crowd, and (5) being outside the home alone  
             The individual avoids these situations because of thoughts that escape might be difficult or help unavailable if paniclike symptoms or other embarrassing symptoms (eg, fear of falling in the elderly or fear of incontinence) should develop  
             The agoraphobic situations almost always provokes immediate fear or anxiety 
             The agoraphobic situations are actively avoided, necessitate the presence of a companion, or are endured with intense fear or anxiety  
             The fear or anxiety is out of proportion to the actual threat posed by the agoraphobic situation and to the sociocultural context  
             The fear, anxiety, or avoidance persists, typically for 6 months or longer 
             The fear, anxiety or avoidance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning  
             If another medical condition (eg, inflammatory bowel disease or Parkinson disease) is present, the fear, anxiety, or avoidance is clearly excessive  
             The fear, anxiety, or avoidance cannot be better explained by the symptoms of another mental disorder—for example, the symptoms are not confined to specific phobia, situational type; do not involve only social situations (as in social anxiety disorder); are not related exclusively to obsessions (as in OCD), perceived defects or flaws in physical appearance (as in body dysmorphic disorder), reminders of traumatic events (as in PTSD), or fear of separation (as in separation anxiety disorder)  Although agoraphobia may be associated with panic disorder, it is diagnosed irrespective of the presence of panic disorder. In cases where the presentation meets the criteria for both panic disorder and agoraphobia, both diagnoses should be applied.  
       Pathophysiology 
         Several biologic theories are postulated for the pathogenesis of phobic disorders, most focusing on the dysregulation of endogenous biogenic amines. Sympathetic nervous system activation is common in phobic disorders, resulting in elevations in heart rate and blood pressure, as well as symptoms such as tremor, palpitations, sweating, dyspnea, dizziness, and paresthesias. [ Psychological theories range from explaining anxiety as a displacement of an intrapsychic conflict (psychodynamic models) to conditioning (learned) paradigms (cognitive-behavior models). Many of these theories capture portions of the disorder.  A psychoanalyst would likely conceptualize social anxiety as a symptom of a deeper conflict—for instance, low self-esteem or unresolved conflicts with internal objects. The treatment uses exploration with the goal of understanding the underlying conflict.  A behaviorist would see phobia as a learned, conditioned response resulting from a past association with a situation that had negative emotional valence at the time of association (eg, social situations are avoided because intense anxiety was originally experienced in that setting). Even if no danger is posed in most social encounters, an avoidance response has been linked to these situations. Treatment from this perspective aims to weaken and eventually separate the specific response from the stimulus.  Genetic factors seem to play a role in both social anxiety disorder (social phobia) and specific phobia. On the basis of family and twin studies, the risks for specific phobia and social anxiety disorder appear to be moderately heritable. [ Preliminary neuroimaging evidence indicates that while different patterns of brain activation might be associated with the different phobias, [ [ 
       Etiology 
         Neurobiologic and psychological theories, as well as familial patterns, have contributed to understanding the underlying causes of phobic disorders.  
         Neurobiologic theories 
           Social anxiety disorder (social phobia) Functional brain imaging studies of individuals engaged in public speaking suggest that patients with social anxiety disorder tend to overactivate a circuit involving the amygdala (related to face recognition and negative emotions) and the hippocampus; this may be the substrate for the exaggerated fear response. [ [ Positron emission tomography (PET) has shown lower serotonin (5-HT) 1A binding in the amygdala and mesiofrontal areas, and negative correlations between cortisol plasma levels and 5-HT1A binding in the amygdala, hippocampus, and retrosplenial cortex have been reported in patients with social anxiety disorder. [ A review of 48 neuroimaging articles involving social anxiety disorder concluded that increased activity in the limbic and paralimbic regions is the most consistent finding (across imaging techniques) in social anxiety disorder. [ 
           Specific phobia Phobic reactions may result from activation of object recognition and emotional processing areas occurring in conjunction with inhibition of the prefrontal areas that are responsible for cognitive control over emotion-triggering. [ A PET study showed that the phobic response in spider phobia (SpP) and snake phobia (SnP) phobia increased regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) in the right amygdala, the cerebellum, and the left visual cortex but reduced rCBF in the prefrontal, orbitofrontal, ventromedial, primary somatosensory cortex, as well as auditory cortices. A positive correlation between amygdala activation and the subjective fear response emphasizes the importance of amygdala in this fear-phobia circuit. [ Partially distinct neurobiologic substrates have been suggested for different types of phobias. A functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study of patients with SpP and blood-injection-injury phobia (BiiP) reported similar activation in several common regions across the 2 groups (thalamus, cerebellum, and occipitotemporal regions) but also group-specific activation in the dorsal anterior cingulate gyrus and the anterior insula in patients with SpP. [ Increased fMRI activation of the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), insula, thalamus, and visual areas, as well as the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, has been reported in patients with SpP as compared with normal controls during an anticipatory task of phobia-relevant versus neutral stimulation. [ 
         Psychological theories Social anxiety disorder can be initiated by traumatic social experience (eg, embarrassment) or by social-skills deficits that produce recurring negative experiences. Hypersensitivity to rejection, perhaps related to serotonergic or dopaminergic dysfunction, is present. It is theorized that social anxiety disorder represents an interaction between biologic and genetic factors and environmental events.  Specific phobia can be acquired through conditioning, modeling, or a traumatic experience; it may even have a genetic component (eg, blood-injury phobia).  Agoraphobia may be the result of repeated and unexpected panic attacks, which, in turn, may be linked to cognitive distortions, conditioned responses, or abnormalities in noradrenergic, serotonergic, or gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)–related neurotransmission.  
         Familial patterns A familial pattern has been reported for both social anxiety disorder and specific phobia. Generalized social anxiety disorder further increases the risk of familial transmission. With respect to specific phobia, first-degree relatives appear to have an increased risk for the subtype of the phobia rather than for the specific trigger. For example, a given family may exhibit an increased rate of animal phobias rather than share a phobia of a specific animal. [ 
       Epidemiology 
         United States statistics The 12-month prevalence rates for the United States are estimated as follows [ 
           
             Social anxiety disorder (social phobia) - 7% 
             Specific phobia - 7-9% 
             Agoraphobia - 1.7% 
         International statistics Social anxiety disorder appears to be less common in much of the world than it is in the United States, with 12-month prevalence estimates clustering in the range of 0.5-2.0%; median prevalence in Europe is 2.3%. Prevalence estimates for specific phobia in European countries are close to those in the United States (~6%) but are generally lower in Asian, African, and Latin American countries (2-4%). [ 
         Age-related demographics In the United States, social anxiety disorder tends to start early in life, with 75% of the patients experiencing its onset between ages 8 and 15 years and a median age at onset of 13 years. [ [ [ [ In general, specific phobia appears earlier than either social anxiety disorder or agoraphobia does. Most such phobias develop during childhood and eventually disappear. The estimated prevalence of specific phobia is approximately 5% in younger children [ [ [ The 12-month prevalence of agoraphobia in adolescents and adults is approximately 1.7%. [ [ [ 
         Sex-related demographics The phobic disorders appear to have a higher incidence among women. Higher rates of social anxiety disorder are found in females in the general population (with female-to-male ratios ranging from 1.5:1 to 2.2:1), [ [ Females are more frequently affected by specific phobia than males, at a rate of approximately 2:1, though rates vary across different phobic stimuli. Animal, natural environment, and situational specific phobias are predominately experienced by females, whereas blood-injection-injury phobia is experienced equally by the 2 sexes. [ Agoraphobia has a female-to-male ratio of 2-3:1. [ 
         Race-related demographics The prevalence of social anxiety disorder in the United States is higher in American Indians and lower in persons of Asian, Latino, African American, and Afro-Caribbean descent as compared with non-Hispanic white individuals. Prevalence figures for specific phobia and agoraphobia appear not to vary substantially across cultural or racial groups. [ 
       Prognosis 
         Most patients respond to treatment, with good resolution of symptoms. Patients with specific phobia often regain the highest level of functioning, whereas those with agoraphobia or social anxiety disorders may have residual symptoms or run a greater risk of relapse even after successful treatment. In fact, patients with social anxiety disorders with extensive deficits in social skills may not respond well to treatment; in one study, social anxiety disorder had the smallest probability of recovery after 12 years of follow-up. [ The prognosis is determined by several factors, including the following: 
           
             Severity of diagnosis 
             level of functioning before onset of symptoms 
             Degree of motivation for treatment 
             level of support (eg, from family, friends, work, or school) 
             Ability to comply with medication regimens, psychotherapeutic regimens, or both Considerable evidence shows that social anxiety disorder results in significant functional impairment and decreased quality of life. [ Phobias are highly comorbid, social anxiety disorder in particular. Most comorbid social anxiety disorders and specific phobias are temporally primary, whereas most comorbid agoraphobia is temporally secondary. Comorbid phobias are generally more severe than pure phobias. Social anxiety disorder is also frequently comorbid with  major depressive disorder [ There has been some controversy regarding whether  anxiety disorders Current evidence suggests that even after adjustment for sociodemographic factors and other mental disorders, the baseline presence of any anxiety disorder—including agoraphobia, social anxiety disorder, and specific phobia—is significantly associated with suicidal ideation and suicide attempts. Additionally, the presence of any anxiety disorder(again, including any phobic disorder) in combination with a mood disorder appears to increase the likelihood of suicide attempts over what would be expected with a mood disorder alone. [ Significant morbidity is also possible in terms of work and relationships, especially in social phobia and agoraphobia. Patients with severe agoraphobia may be housebound and therefore unable to seek out medical attention when needed. Patients with concomitant panic attacks are at higher risk for substance abuse and suicide.  
       Patient Education 
         The treating physician should begin a process of education, not only for the patient but also for family and friends who may be confused about the diagnosis and the need for treatment.  Commonplace abilities such as socializing at gatherings or riding in a small elevator are taken for granted by most people, but patients who experience phobias may have tremendous difficulty in these areas and can be greatly helped significantly by a caring support system. Family and friends can encourage patients to confront fears and help them when necessary (eg, with medication compliance); they can also assist by learning when to stay out of the way and allow patients to venture forth on their own.  Numerous books and self-help groups are available. In addition, patient advocacy groups exist nationwide that provide patients with information, give presentations, and hold conferences. The following Web sites are helpful:  
           
             
               Social Phobia/Social Anxiety Association 
             
               American Psychiatric Association 
             
               Anxiety Disorders Association of America 
             MedlinePlus,  Phobias 
             MayoClinic.com,  Phobias 
             US Food and Drug Administration (FDA),  Fighting Phobias, The Things That Go Bump in the Mind For patient education information, see the  Mental Health Center Anxiety Panic Attacks Hyperventilation 
     Clinical Presentation 
       History 
         Phobic disorders can be disabling and cause severe emotional distress, leading to other anxiety disorders, depression, suicidal ideation, and substance-related disorders, especially alcohol abuse or dependence. The physician must inquire about these areas as well.  Inquire about the amount of caffeine intake (including coffee, caffeinated teas, or sodas). Considering the overall noradrenergic hyperdrive of this group of patients, even moderate amounts of coffee might exacerbate the anxiety response and symptoms.  If social anxiety disorder (social phobia) is suspected, ask the patient about any difficulties in social situations, such as speaking in public, eating in a restaurant, or using public washrooms. Fear of scrutiny by others or of being embarrassed or humiliated is commonly described by people with this disorder.  If a specific phobia is suspected, ask about irrational and out-of-proportion fear or avoidance of particular objects or situations (eg, animals, insects, blood, needles, flying, or heights). Assess intensity and course of fear.  If agoraphobia is suspected, inquire about any intense anxiety and avoidance of the feared object/situation following exposure to specific situations such as heights, animals, small spaces, or storms. Other areas of inquiry should include fear of being trapped without escape (eg, being outside the home and alone, in a crowd of unfamiliar people, on a bridge, in a tunnel, or in a moving vehicle).  
       Physical Examination 
         Anxiety is the most common feature in phobic disorders. Manifestations include the following (all of which should be asked about and assessed):  
           
             Elevated heart rate 
             Elevated blood pressure 
             Tremor 
             Palpitations 
             Diarrhea 
             Sweating 
             Dyspnea 
             Paresthesias 
             Dizziness Because anxiety manifests with a number of physical symptoms, any patient who presents with a de novo complaint of physical symptoms suggestive of an anxiety disorder should undergo a physical examination to help rule out medical conditions that might present with anxietylike symptoms (see Differentials). If a patient presents for a repeat visit with similar complaints, after medical contributors have been ruled out, a careful  mental status examination When considering anxiety as the primary suspect, the physician should always remember that over time, patients with anxiety are just as likely to develop medical conditions as other patients are. Accordingly, a diagnosis of anxiety, though changing the threshold for investigation of physical symptoms, should not keep the patient from receiving regular follow-up examinations as otherwise indicated.  More than 75% of patients with blood-injection-injury type phobia report a history of fainting in situations where they are presented with a trigger. Initial increases in heart rate and blood pressure are followed by decreases in both parameters, resulting in fainting. This physiologic response differs from the typical response seen in other phobias, in which exposure is followed by increased heart rate and blood pressure. [ 
         Mental status examination The physician should assess the patient’s appearance, behavior, ability to cooperate with the examination, level of activity, speech, mood and affect, thought processes and content, insight, and judgment.  In a situation where the patient is abruptly confronted with the object of his or her phobia, his or her mental status examination will be significant for an anxious affect, with a restricted range. Neurovegetative signs (eg, tremor or diaphoresis) may be present. The patient also reports feeling anxious (mood) and can clearly identify the reason for his/her anxiety (thought content). The thought content is significant for phobic ideation (unrealistic and out-of-proportion fears).  Insight may be impaired, especially during exposure, but in most cases, insight is preserved. Although patients still report that they cannot control their feelings, they also acknowledge that the severity of their fears is not justified.  At any other time, the mental status of a patient with phobic disorder is within normal limits, except for thought content positive for phobic ideation. These phobic ideas may remain undisclosed unless specific questions about phobias are asked. Phobic disorders themselves do not present with suicidal or homicidal ideation, but comorbid conditions commonly associated with them (eg, depression and other anxiety disorders) often do. If comorbid conditions exist, the suicidal and homicidal risk should also be specifically assessed.  
       Complications 
         If left untreated, social anxiety disorder or agoraphobia can result in tremendous morbidity. The patient becomes restricted to the most familiar surroundings (eg, a house) or the most trusted people (eg, a family member or spouse), and his or her ability to work and relate to other people is substantially impaired. In addition, there is a considerable risk of substance abuse with this degree of isolation, [ [ Specific phobia has been associated with increased risk for suicide attempts and possibly suicidal ideation. [ 
     Differential Diagnoses 
       Diagnostic Considerations Anxiety secondary to medical conditions must be excluded. Many anxiety attack symptoms resemble those found in life-threatening medical disorders (eg, myocardial infarction), which must be ruled out first.  Phobic disorders in general have a higher female preponderance, though a higher percentage of men tend to seek treatment for social anxiety disorder. Earlier median ages at illness onset are reported for specific phobia and social anxiety disorder than for agoraphobia. [ [ In addition to the conditions listed in the differential diagnosis, other problems to be considered include the following: 
         
           Alcoholism 
           Body dysmorphic disorder 
           Bulimia nervosa 
           Delusional disorder 
           Depersonalization disorder 
           Depression 
           Eating disorder, anorexia 
           Hyperhidrosis 
           Hypochondriasis 
           Hypoglycemia 
           Mitral valve prolapse 
           Paruresis 
           Pervasive developmental disorder 
           Pheochromocytoma 
           Schizophrenia 
           Seizure 
           Somatoform disorders 
           Stimulants 
           Ventricular premature complexes 
           Vertigo 
           Vestibular dysfunction 
       
         Angina Pectoris 
         Anxiety Disorders 
         Hyperparathyroidism 
         Hyperthyroidism 
         Panic Disorder 
         Pediatric Social Phobia and Selective Mutism 
         Personality Disorders 
         Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 
         Separation Anxiety and School Refusal 
     Workup 
       Approach Considerations 
         Any patient who presents with a new complaint of physical symptoms suggesting an anxiety disorder should undergo a basic laboratory workup to help rule out medical conditions that might present with anxietylike symptoms, such as those in the differential diagnosis (see Differentials).  To rule out anxiety secondary to medical conditions, the following laboratory tests may be helpful: 
           
             Thyroid function tests - Hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism 
             Fasting glucose - Hypoglycemia 
             Calcium - Hyperparathyroidism 
             24-hour urine for 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) - Pheochromocytoma 
             Drug screen - Substance-induced anxiety The following studies may also be considered: 
           
             Electrocardiography (ECG) and cardiac enzyme tests - Myocardial infarction or arrhythmia 
             Electroencephalography (EEG) - Seizure disorders (these conditions may mimic anxiety) At present, provocation studies with carbon dioxide, sodium lactate, or yohimbine are reserved for research purposes. Imaging studies are limited to presentations where medical illness, such as a seizure disorder, is suspected. 
           
             Computed tomography (CT) of the head - Suspected intracranial abnormality 
             Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) - Intracranial abnormality 
             Echocardiography - Mitral valve prolapse 
             Positron emission tomography (PET) - This is currently reserved for research purposes 
     Treatment & Management 
       Approach Considerations 
         Anxiety often is not a significantly pathologic condition but simply a physiologic reaction that can be expected to occur under stressful life circumstances. Most anxiety reactions do not result in dysfunction or disability and will remit spontaneously over time. In addition, high placebo response rates have been documented across a range of anxiety disorders. [ Treatment of phobic disorders usually consists of pharmacotherapy, psychotherapy, or some combination thereof. [ 
       Pharmacotherapy 
         Social anxiety disorder (social phobia) At present, 3 drugs are approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of social anxiety disorder, as follows:  
           
             The selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) paroxetine and sertraline 
             The selective serotonin/norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (SNRI) venlafaxine In addition, placebo-controlled, randomized controlled trials and systematic reviews show that social anxiety disorder responds to the following agents:  
           
             The SSRIs escitalopram, [ 
             The monoamine oxidase inhibitor (MAOI) phenelzine 
             The reversible inhibitor of monoamine oxidase A (RIMA) moclobemide (not approved in the United States) [ Overall, SSRIs appear to be more effective than MAOIs for the treatment of social anxiety disorder. [ [ Antihypertensive beta-blocker therapy can be used as an augmentation strategy. Propranolol may be useful for the circumscribed treatment of situational/performance anxiety on an as-needed basis. [ Selected anticonvulsants (eg, gabapentin, pregabalin, valproic acid, topiramate, and tiagabine) have been shown to be effective for social anxiety disorder in mostly open-label, uncontrolled clinical trials. [ [ [ 
           Acute treatment Treatment of social anxiety disorder should be initiated with an SSRI, titrated to the minimum effective dosage. If the response is partial or nonexistent at 6 weeks, the dosage may be increased; this may be done every 2 weeks until the maximum dose is reached.  Patients in whom SSRI therapy fails will sometimes respond to treatment with a high-potency benzodiazepine (eg, clonazepam), an alpha-2-delta calcium channel blocker (eg, gabapentin or pregabalin), the antiepileptic levetiracetam, or the antipsychotic olanzapine; they may also respond to combined SSRI-benzodiazepine therapy. [ Buspirone, the beta-blocker atenolol, and the TCA imipramine are all of unproven efficacy in this setting. [ 
           Long-term treatment Long-term treatment data from double-blind, randomized controlled trials addressing social anxiety disorder show that continuing SSRI or venlafaxine therapy for up to 6 months can result in increased treatment response rates. [ [ Beta-blockers, clonidine, and buspirone usually are not helpful for long-term treatment of social anxiety disorder. After 6-12 months of full response, slow tapering of pharmacotherapy should be considered. If symptoms recur after tapering, therapy should be restarted and continued indefinitely. [ 
         Specific phobia To date, no controlled studies have demonstrated the efficacy of psychopharmacologic intervention for specific phobias. Clinical lore suggests that as-needed administration of a short-acting benzodiazepine might be useful for temporary anxiety relief in specific situations (eg, right before boarding a plane, for patients with a fear of flying).  
         Agoraphobia Randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials have shown that agoraphobia, specifically the panic symptoms, responds to treatment with SSRIs (eg, escitalopram, citalopram, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxetine, and sertraline), [ [ [ 
           Acute treatment Treatment for agoraphobia should be started with an SSRI at a low dosage, which is then titrated to the minimum dosage that effectively controls the patient’s panic. Benzodiazepines can be used either as an adjunct or as primary treatment; however, they are usually not chosen as first-line therapy because of the potential for abuse. [ If the response is minimal or nonexistent after 6 weeks, the SSRI dosage may be further increased every 2 weeks until a response is achieved or the maximal dosage reached. If the response is partial or absent at the highest SSRI dosage, the following alternatives should be considered:  
           
             Switch to a different SSRI 
             Switch to an agent from a different drug class (eg, venlafaxine, reboxetine, or a TCA Long-acting benzodiazepines (eg, diazepam and clonazepam) prescribed on a standing rather than an as-needed basis are preferred because of the reduced addictive potential; the dosage can be increased every 2-3 days until either the panic symptoms are controlled or the maximum dosage is reached. The short-acting agent alprazolam may be considered for short-term use to control acute symptoms of panic.  Agents with unproven efficacy in this setting include buspirone, propranolol, antihistaminic drugs, and antipsychotic agents. [ 
           Long-term treatment Double-blind studies show that continuing an SSRI or clomipramine from 12 to 52 weeks results in increased treatment response rates. [ 
         Pediatric, adolescent, and young adult suicidality Suicide risk must always be considered, particularly in the treatment of a child or adolescent with a mood disorder. Physicians are advised to be aware of the following information and use appropriate caution when considering treatment with SSRIs in the pediatric and geriatric populations.  In October 2003, the FDA issued a public health advisory regarding reports of suicidality in pediatric patients being treated with antidepressant medications for major depressive disorder. This advisory reported suicidality (both ideation and attempts) in clinical trials of various antidepressant drugs in pediatric patients. The FDA asked that additional studies be performed, because suicidality occurred in both treated and untreated patients with major depression and thus could not be definitively linked to drug treatment.  In December 2003, the UK Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) issued an advisory stating that most SSRIs are not suitable for use by persons younger than 18 years for treatment of “depressive illness.” After review, the MHRA decided that the risks that SSRI therapy posed to pediatric patients outweighed the benefits, except in the case of fluoxetine, which appeared to have a positive risk-benefit ratio in the treatment of depressive illness in patients younger than 18 years.  
       Psychotherapy 
         Controlled studies have found behavioral therapy and cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) to be effective in treating phobic disorders. [ [ Psychodynamic therapy (or insight-oriented therapy) is rarely indicated as an exclusive treatment for phobias and is now mostly reserved for cases of phobic disorders that overlap personality disorders. Deciding which treatment or combination of treatments to prescribe depends on a careful interview and assessment of the patient’s goals and level of pathology.  
         Social anxiety disorder (social phobia) For treatment of social anxiety disorder, self-exposure monotherapy has been shown to work as well as computer-based exposure training, clinician-led exposure, or combination therapies of self-exposure and CBT/self-help manual. [ [ 
         Specific phobia A CBT-based approach, including gradual desensitization, is the most commonly used treatment for specific phobia. Other treatments include relaxation and breathing control techniques.  Randomized controlled clinical trials indicate that specific phobias respond to exposure therapy. [ [ In one study, after the successful completion of a 4-session CBT course, patients with specific phobias no longer showed significant functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) activation in the prefrontal or parahippocampal areas [ In another study, a single 4-hour CBT session, combined in vivo exposure, and modeling resulted in increased/improved medial orbitofrontal cortex activity and decreased/improved activation in the amygdala and the insula patients with specific phobias as compared with untreated control subjects. [ 
         Agoraphobia A 2010 meta-analysis showed that a combination of exposure therapy, relaxation, and breathing retraining worked better than other psychological interventions for panic disorder with and without agoraphobia. [ [ 
       Diet and Activity 
         The patient’s intake of caffeine (eg, in coffee, caffeinated teas, or sodas) should be assessed; even moderate amounts of caffeine may exacerbate the anxiety response and symptoms. In a small, double-blind, placebo-controlled study, a tryptophan-rich diet was shown to have a positive effect on social anxiety disorder. [ Activity should not be restricted. Patients should be encouraged to confront anxiety-producing stimuli in the context of a behavioral therapy treatment plan.  
       Prevention 
         Overwhelming exposure in early childhood (eg, a frightening experience with an aggressive dog) may predispose the child to the development of phobic symptoms. Intervention (eg, psychotherapy or medication) in the early stages of symptom development may be beneficial in preventing the worsening of symptoms.  
       Consultations 
         Physicians without expertise in conducting behavioral therapy may want to consult with a psychiatric center specializing in treatment of anxiety disorders, either for guidance on developing a treatment plan or, in more difficult cases, for referral.  Consultation with an internist or a neurologist may be helpful for sorting through the nonpsychiatric differential diagnosis, especially if rare disorders, such as pheochromocytoma, are suspected (see Differentials).  
       Long-Term Monitoring 
         Inpatient treatment is indicated only for patients with a severe phobic disorder who presenting with acute suicidal ideation or attempts. In addition, inpatient treatment (including detoxification, rehabilitation, or both) may be recommended for treatment of secondary drug or alcohol abuse or dependence.  Outpatient follow-up is usually required until the patient’s symptoms have resolved. After the resolution of the symptoms, the physician can attempt to taper pharmacotherapy, as well as monitor for relapse.  
     Medication 
       Medication Summary Pharmacotherapy for phobic disorders (ie, social anxiety disorder, specific phobia, and agoraphobia) includes antidepressant agents (eg, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors [SSRIs] and selective serotonin/norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors [SNRIs]), benzodiazepines, serotonin (5HT) 1 agonists, antihypertensive agents, tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs).  
       Antidepressants, SSRIs 
         Class Summary SSRIs can help prevent panic attacks and alleviate symptoms of anxiety and depression. These drugs may require 2-6 weeks of daily use to become effective, usually with side effects appearing first. SSRIs have been shown to be effective in controlled clinical trials, and as a class, these medications tend to have the fewest adverse effects. However, the SSRIs can produce drug-drug interactions by inhibiting cytochrome P450 enzymes and by displacing other drugs from protein-binding sites. SSRIs are greatly preferred to other classes of antidepressants for the treatment of anxiety disorders, and they all appear to be similarly efficacious. The choice of an SSRI depends on adverse effects, drug interactions, and history of previous response. The relatively benign adverse effect profile of SSRIs (including minimal anticholinergic effects) facilitates compliance. Common adverse effects include insomnia, ejaculation disorder (primarily ejaculatory delay), nausea, sweating, fatigue, somnolence, and sexual dysfunction. SSRIs do not carry the cardiac arrhythmia risk associated with TCAs. 
         Citalopram hydrobromide (Celexa) Citalopram enhances serotonin activity through selective reuptake inhibition at the neuronal membrane. This agent is not approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for treatment of anxiety disorders, but data from randomized, controlled trials support its use for treatment of agoraphobia.  
         Escitalopram oxalate (Lexapro) Escitalopram is an S-enantiomer of citalopram. The onset of depression relief may be obtained after 1-2 weeks, which is sooner than relief can be obtained with other antidepressants, suggesting that escitalopram may work faster than similar drugs. Although this agent is not approved by the FDA for treatment of phobic disorders, its class membership and good tolerability make it an attractive option for long-term treatment. Off-label use of escitalopram for anxiety disorders includes social anxiety disorder (social phobia), panic disorder, and obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). Escitalopram is not approved for use in children younger than 12 years.  
         Paroxetine hydrochloride (Paxil, Paxil CR, Pexeva) Paroxetine is a potent selective inhibitor of neuronal serotonin reuptake, but it has a weak effect on norepinephrine and dopamine neuronal reuptake. This agent is a low-affinity antagonist at some subtypes of muscarinic acetylcholine receptors and is a nitric oxide synthase inhibitor. The anticholinergic effects of paroxetine may result in sedation or cardiovascular effects. Paroxetine is FDA-approved for use in social anxiety disorder (social phobia), panic disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, OCD, major depressive disorder (MDD), premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD), and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD).  
         Sertraline hydrochloride (Zoloft) Sertraline selectively inhibits presynaptic serotonin reuptake and is a low-potency dopamine and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor. It is-FDA approved for use in social anxiety disorder; panic disorder; major depressive disorder; OCD in adults, children, and adolescents; PMDD; and PTSD.  
         Fluoxetine (Prozac, Prozac Weekly) Fluoxetine selectively inhibits presynaptic serotonin reuptake but has minimal or no effect on reuptake of norepinephrine or dopamine. A common side effect is sexual dysfunction, which may impact long-term compliance. Fluoxetine is FDA-approved for use in panic disorder (with and without agoraphobia) and OCD, as well as other disorders.  
         Fluvoxamine (Luvox CR) Fluvoxamine enhances serotonin activity through selective reuptake inhibition at the neuronal membrane. Because this drug does not significantly bind to alpha-adrenergic, histamine, or cholinergic receptors, it has fewer side effects than TCAs do. Fluvoxamine is FDA-approved for treating OCD in children (8-17 years) and adults; it is also approved for treating social anxiety disorder. Fluvoxamine may be helpful for other anxiety disorders as well.  
       Antidepressants, SNRIs 
         Class Summary SNRIs can help prevent panic attacks and alleviate symptoms of anxiety and depression. 
         Venlafaxine hydrochloride (Effexor XR) Venlafaxine is a reuptake inhibitor of both serotonin and norepinephrine. It is FDA-approved (in the extended-release capsule only) for the treatment of social phobia, panic disorder with or without agoraphobia, and generalized anxiety disorder.  
       Benzodiazepines 
         Class Summary In general, this category of medication should not be prescribed to patients with a history of alcohol/drug abuse or emotional dependence. Some psychiatrists feel that the longer-acting benzodiazepines (eg, diazepam, clonazepam) have advantages such as less frequent dosing and more consistent levels throughout the day. Slowly taper benzodiazepines (usually after 6 mo) to avoid withdrawal and to avoid precipitating panic.  
         Alprazolam (Xanax, Xanax XR, Niravam) Alprazolam is the best-studied benzodiazepine. It has a rapid onset (20 minutes) and a short half-life, which can contribute to increased dependency during tapering attempts. Alprazolam is FDA approved for use in panic disorder, with or without agoraphobia, generalized anxiety disorder, and anxiety disorders (in the immediate-release tablet).  
         Lorazepam (Ativan) Lorazepam is a sedative hypnotic with a short onset of effects and a relatively long half-life. By increasing the action of gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA), which is a major inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain, lorazepam may depress all levels of the central nervous system (CNS), including the limbic and reticular formation. This agent is FDA-approved for use in anxiety disorders. When a patient must be sedated for longer than 24 hours, lorazepam is an excellent choice. It is not significantly metabolized by the liver, and it can be administered either intravenously (IV) or intramuscularly (IM).  
         Clonazepam (Klonopin) Clonazepam is a long-acting benzodiazepine that increases presynaptic GABA inhibition and reduces monosynaptic and polysynaptic reflexes. This drug also suppresses muscle contractions by facilitating inhibitory GABA neurotransmission and other inhibitory transmitters. Clonazepam reaches peak plasma concentration at 2-4 hours after oral or rectal administration. Clonazepam has multiple indications, including suppression of myoclonic, akinetic, or petit mal seizure activity and focal or generalized dystonias (eg, tardive dystonia). This agent is FDA-approved for use in anxiety disorders.  
         Diazepam (Diastat AcuDial, Diastat Pediatric, Valium) Diazepam modulates the postsynaptic effects of GABA-A transmission, thereby bringing about an increase in presynaptic inhibition. This agent appears to act on part of the limbic system, the thalamus, and hypothalamus to induce a calming effect and has also been found to be an effective adjunct for the relief of skeletal muscle spasm caused by upper motor neuron disorders. This agent is FDA-approved for use in anxiety disorders. Diazepam is rapidly distributed to other body fat stores. To avoid adverse effects, the diazepam dosage should be individualized and increased cautiously; the serum concentration of the drug drops to 20% of its peak value 20 minutes after the initial IV infusion.  
       Antianxiety Agents 
         Class Summary Serotonin agonists such as buspirone may be used to treat anxiety. 
         Buspirone Buspirone is an antianxiety agent that is not chemically or pharmacologically related to the benzodiazepines, barbiturates, or other sedative or anxiolytic drugs. Rather, it is a 5-HT1 agonist with serotonergic neurotransmission and some dopaminergic effects in the CNS. Buspirone has an anxiolytic effect but may take up to 2-3 weeks to reach its full efficacy. Buspirone is approved for the treatment of anxiety disorders or short-term relief of the symptoms of anxiety.  
       Antihypertensive Agents 
         Class Summary Antihypertensive agents are useful for the circumscribed treatment of situational/performance anxiety on an as-needed basis. Beta-adrenergic blockers reduce the inotropic state of the left ventricle (LV), decrease diastolic dysfunction, and increase LV compliance, thereby reducing the pressure gradient across the LV outflow tract. Decreasing myocardial oxygen consumption reduces myocardial ischemia potential, and lowering the heart rate reduces myocardial oxygen consumption and myocardial ischemia potential. 
         Atenolol (Tenormin) Atenolol acts by selectively blocking beta1 receptors, with little or no effect on beta2 receptors. Beta-blockers affect blood pressure via multiple mechanisms, including a negative chronotropic effect that decreases heart rate at rest and after exercise, a negative inotropic effect that decreases cardiac output, reduction of sympathetic outflow from the CNS, and suppression of renin release from the kidneys. Atenolol is used to improve and preserve hemodynamic status by acting on myocardial contractility, reducing congestion, and decreasing myocardial energy expenditure. During IV administration, the patient's blood pressure, heart rate, and electrocardiogram (ECG) must be carefully monitored.  
         Propranolol (Inderal LA, InnoPran XL) Propranolol is recommended for situational social anxiety (stage fright) on an as-needed basis. An oral (PO) dose of 10-20 mg is given  
       Antidepressants, TCAs 
         Class Summary The tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) clomipramine and imipramine have demonstrated efficacy for the treatment of panic disorder with and without agoraphobia. These are also relatively inexpensive medications. However, due to their broad spectrum of action and their inhibition of multiple neurotransmitter systems, the TCAs have more side effects, such as anticholinergic and cardiovascular side effects, and therefore, these agents present problems for long-term treatment. The treatment response of TCAs occurs on the same order as the Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), within 2-6 weeks.  TCAs have a black box warning that states that patients with major depressive disorder (MDD), both adult and pediatric, may experience worsening of their depression and/or the emergence of suicidal ideation and behavior (suicidality) or unusual changes in behavior, whether or not they are taking antidepressant medications.  
         Clomipramine hydrochloride (Anafranil) Clomipramine is a dibenzazepine compound that belongs to the TCA family. It acts by inhibiting the membrane pump mechanism responsible for norepinephrine and serotonin uptake in adrenergic and serotonergic neurons. Clomipramine affects serotonin uptake; it also affects norepinephrine uptake when converted into its metabolite desmethylclomipramine. Clomipramine acts as an antagonist at muscarinic acetylcholine receptors and is also an antagonist at histamine H1 receptors. Clomipramine is approved by the FDA for use in the treatment of OCD (adult and pediatric, age ≥10 years).  
         Imipramine hydrochloride (Tofranil, Tofranil-PM) Imipramine hydrochloride inhibits reuptake of norepinephrine or serotonin at the presynaptic neuron. This agent is an antagonist at histamine H1 and alpha1 adrenoceptors, as well as at M2 muscarinic acetylcholine receptors. Parenteral administration can be used for starting therapy only in patients unable or unwilling to use oral medication.  
       Antidepressants, MAO Inhibitors 
         Class Summary MAOIs are most commonly prescribed for patients with social anxiety disorder (social phobia). Their main advantages are a low risk of dependence and a lesser anticholinergic effect than is seen with TCAs. Their main disadvantage is the higher number of adverse effects, including sexual difficulty, hypotension, and weight gain. A diet low in tyramine must be followed to avoid a hypertensive crisis. Use concomitant medications, including over-the-counter medications, with great caution. Because of the high risk for serotonin syndrome or hypertensive crisis, MAOIs are contraindicated in patients taking selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors; dual serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors; tricyclic antidepressants; bupropion (Wellbutrin); mirtazapine (Remeron); buspirone (Buspar); and certain analgesics, vasoconstrictors, sympathomimetics, and anticonvulsants.  
         Phenelzine (Nardil) Phenelzine is the most commonly used MAOI for anxiety disorders. (Tranylcypromine 30-60 mg/day is also effective.) Phenelzine is usually reserved for patients who cannot tolerate or do not respond to TCAs or SSRIs.  
         Selegiline (Emsam) Selegiline is a selective MAO-B inhibitor at lower therapeutic doses. As such, at the target dose of 6 mg per 24 hours, special dietary restrictions are not needed. In addition, the selegiline transdermal patch has the advantage of avoiding the first pass effect, which decreases the impact of CYP high/low-metabolizer status in terms of medication effects and tolerability.  
       Anticonvulsants 
         Class Summary Selected anticonvulsants have been shown to be effective for social anxiety disorder in mostly open-label, uncontrolled clinical trials and may also be useful in the treatment of other phobic disorders.  
         Gabapentin (Neurontin, Gralise) Gabapentin is a membrane stabilizer and a structural analogue of the inhibitory neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), which, paradoxically, is thought not to exert effects on GABA receptors. It appears to exert action via the alpha-2-delta1 and alpha-2-delta2 auxiliary subunits of voltage-gated calcium channels and has apparent anxiolytic properties. 
         Pregabalin (Lyrica) Pregabalin is a structural derivative of GABA. Its mechanism of action is unknown. It binds with high affinity to alpha-2-delta calcium channel subunits. In vitro, it reduces the calcium-dependent release of several neurotransmitters, possibly by modulating calcium channel function. 
         Valproic acid (Depakote, Depakote ER, Depakene, Stavzor) The mechanism of action of valproic acid is not established; its activity may be related to increased brain levels of GABA or enhanced GABA action. Valproic acid may also potentiate postsynaptic GABA responses, affect the potassium channel, or exert a direct membrane-stabilizing effect. 
     
       Author 
         Adrian Preda, MD Health Sciences Clinical Professor of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, University of California Irvine School of Medicine Adrian Preda, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  Society of Biological Psychiatry International Congress of Schizophrenia Research Schizophrenia International Research Society Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Chief Editor 
         Iqbal Ahmed, MBBS, FRCPsych (UK) Faculty, Department of Psychiatry, Tripler Army Medical Center; Clinical Professor of Psychiatry, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences; Clinical Professor of Psychiatry, Clinical Professor of Geriatric Medicine, University of Hawaii, John A Burns School of Medicine Iqbal Ahmed, MBBS, FRCPsych (UK) is a member of the following medical societies:  Academy of Psychosomatic Medicine American Neuropsychiatric Association American Society of Clinical Psychopharmacology American Association for Geriatric Psychiatry American Psychiatric Association Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
     Acknowledgements 
       Mohammed A Memon, MD Mohammed A Memon, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American Association for Geriatric Psychiatry American Medical Association American Psychiatric Association Disclosure: Nothing to disclose.  Francisco Talavera, PharmD, PhD Disclosure: Medscape Salary Employment  
     
       American Psychiatric Association.  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, Text Revision (DSM-IV-TR) 
       Mathew SJ, Coplan JD, Gorman JM. Neurobiological mechanisms of social anxiety disorder.  Am J Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Kendler KS, Karkowski LM, Prescott CA. Fears and phobias: reliability and heritability.  Psychol Med [Medline] 
       Fyer AJ, Mannuzza S, Chapman TF, Liebowitz MR, Klein DF. A direct interview family study of social phobia.  Arch Gen Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Van Houtem CM, Laine ML, Boomsma DI, Ligthart L, van Wijk AJ, De Jongh A. A review and meta-analysis of the heritability of specific phobia subtypes and corresponding fears.  J Anxiety Disord [Medline] 
       LeBeau RT, Glenn D, Liao B, et al. Specific phobia: a review of DSM-IV specific phobia and preliminary recommendations for DSM-V.  Depress Anxiety [Medline] 
       Linares IM, Trzesniak C, Chagas MH, Hallak JE, Nardi AE, Crippa JA. Neuroimaging in specific phobia disorder: a systematic review of the literature.  Rev Bras Psiquiatr [Medline] 
       Tillfors M, Furmark T, Marteinsdottir I, Fredrikson M. Cerebral blood flow during anticipation of public speaking in social phobia: a PET study.  Biol Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Tillfors M,  Furmark T,  Marteinsdottir I,  Fischer H,  Pissiota A,  Långström B, et al. Cerebral blood flow in subjects with social phobia during stressful speaking tasks: a PET study.  Am J Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Lanzenberger RR,  Mitterhauser M,  Spindelegger C,  Wadsak W,  Klein N,  Mien LK, et al. Reduced serotonin-1A receptor binding in social anxiety disorder.  Biol Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Lanzenberger R,  Wadsak W,  Spindelegger C,  Mitterhauser M,  Akimova E,  Mien LK, et al. Cortisol plasma levels in social anxiety disorder patients correlate with serotonin-1A receptor binding in limbic brain regions.  Int J Neuropsychopharmacol [Medline] 
       Freitas-Ferrari MC,  Hallak JE,  Trzesniak C,  Filho AS,  Machado-de-Sousa JP,  Chagas MH, et al. Neuroimaging in social anxiety disorder: a systematic review of the literature.  Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Ahs F,  Pissiota A,  Michelgård A,  Frans O,  Furmark T,  Appel L, et al. Disentangling the web of fear: amygdala reactivity and functional connectivity in spider and snake phobia.  Psychiatry Res [Medline] 
       Caseras X,  Giampietro V,  Lamas A,  Brammer M,  Vilarroya O,  Carmona S, et al. The functional neuroanatomy of blood-injection-injury phobia: a comparison with spider phobics and healthy controls.  Psychol Med [Medline] 
       Straube T, Mentzel HJ, Miltner WH. Waiting for spiders: brain activation during anticipatory anxiety in spider phobics.  Neuroimage [Medline] 
       Kessler RC, Petukhova M, Sampson NA, Zaslavsky AM, Wittchen HU. Twelve-month and lifetime prevalence and lifetime morbid risk of anxiety and mood disorders in the United States.  Int J Methods Psychiatr Res [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Lewis-Fernández R, Hinton DE, Laria AJ, et al. Culture and the anxiety disorders: recommendations for DSM-V.  Depress Anxiety [Medline] 
       Kessler RC, Berglund P, Demler O, Jin R, Merikangas KR, Walters EE. Lifetime prevalence and age-of-onset distributions of DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication.  Arch Gen Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Wolitzky-Taylor KB, Castriotta N, Lenze EJ, Stanley MA, Craske MG. Anxiety disorders in older adults: a comprehensive review.  Depress Anxiety [Medline] 
       Ruscio AM, Brown TA, Chiu WT, Sareen J, Stein MB, Kessler RC. Social fears and social phobia in the USA: results from the National Comorbidity Survey Replication.  Psychol Med [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Ollendick TH, King NJ, Muris P. Fears and phobias in children: phenomenology, epidemiology and aetiology.  Child Adolesc Ment Health 
       Wittchen HU, Jacobi F, Rehm J, et al. The size and burden of mental disorders and other disorders of the brain in Europe 2010.  Eur Neuropsychopharmacol [Medline] 
       Beesdo K, Knappe S, Pine DS. Anxiety and anxiety disorders in children and adolescents: developmental issues and implications for DSM-V.  Psychiatr Clin North Am [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Kessler RC, Chiu WT, Jin R, Ruscio AM, Shear K, Walters EE. The epidemiology of panic attacks, panic disorder, and agoraphobia in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication.  Arch Gen Psychiatry [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Fehm L, Pelissolo A, Furmark T, Wittchen HU. Size and burden of social phobia in Europe.  Eur Neuropsychopharmacol [Medline] 
       Wittchen HU, Stein MB, Kessler RC. Social fears and social phobia in a community sample of adolescents and young adults: prevalence, risk factors and co-morbidity.  Psychol Med [Medline] 
       Wittchen HU, Gloster AT, Beesdo-Baum K, Fava GA, Craske MG. Agoraphobia: a review of the diagnostic classificatory position and criteria.  Depress Anxiety [Medline] 
       Bruce SE,  Yonkers KA,  Otto MW,  Eisen JL,  Weisberg RB,  Pagano M, et al. Influence of psychiatric comorbidity on recovery and recurrence in generalized anxiety disorder, social phobia, and panic disorder: a 12-year prospective study.  Am J Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Schneier FR,  Heckelman LR,  Garfinkel R,  Campeas R,  Fallon BA,  Gitow A, et al. Functional impairment in social phobia.  J Clin Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Lochner C, Mogotsi M, du Toit PL, Kaminer D, Niehaus DJ, Stein DJ. Quality of life in anxiety disorders: a comparison of obsessive-compulsive disorder, social anxiety disorder, and panic disorder.  Psychopathology [Medline] 
       Matza LS, Revicki DA, Davidson JR, Stewart JW. Depression with atypical features in the National Comorbidity Survey: classification, description, and consequences.  Arch Gen Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Sareen J,  Cox BJ,  Afifi TO,  de Graaf R,  Asmundson GJ,  ten Have M, et al. Anxiety disorders and risk for suicidal ideation and suicide attempts: a population-based longitudinal study of adults.  Arch Gen Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Stein MB, Stein DJ. Social anxiety disorder.  Lancet [Medline] 
       Beesdo K,  Bittner A,  Pine DS,  Stein MB,  Höfler M,  Lieb R, et al. Incidence of social anxiety disorder and the consistent risk for secondary depression in the first three decades of life.  Arch Gen Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Magee WJ, Eaton WW, Wittchen HU, McGonagle KA, Kessler RC. Agoraphobia, simple phobia, and social phobia in the National Comorbidity Survey.  Arch Gen Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Liotti G. Phobias of Attachment-Related Inner States in the Psychotherapy of Adult Survivors of Childhood Complex Trauma.  J Clin Psychol [Medline] 
       Baldwin DS,  Anderson IM,  Nutt DJ,  Bandelow B,  Bond A,  Davidson JR, et al. Evidence-based guidelines for the pharmacological treatment of anxiety disorders: recommendations from the British Association for Psychopharmacology.  J Psychopharmacol [Medline] 
       de Beurs E, van Balkom AJ, Van Dyck R, Lange A. Long-term outcome of pharmacological and psychological treatment for panic disorder with agoraphobia: a 2-year naturalistic follow-up.  Acta Psychiatr Scand [Medline] 
       Pelissolo A. [Efficacy and tolerability of escitalopram in anxiety disorders: a review].  Encephale [Medline] 
       National Prescribing Service Limited. Escitalopram (Lexapro, Esipram) for generalised anxiety disorder and social anxiety disorder (social phobia). NPS RADAR. Available at  http://bit.ly/dOARMJ 
       Stein DJ, Ipser JC, van Balkom AJ. Pharmacotherapy for social anxiety disorder.  Cochrane Review 
       Westenberg HG. Recent advances in understanding and treating social anxiety disorder.  CNS Spectr [Medline] 
       Ravindran LN, Stein MB. The pharmacologic treatment of anxiety disorders: a review of progress.  J Clin Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Davidson JR. Pharmacotherapy of social anxiety disorder: what does the evidence tell us?.  J Clin Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Offidani E, Guidi J, Tomba E, Fava GA. Efficacy and Tolerability of Benzodiazepines versus Antidepressants in Anxiety Disorders: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.  Psychother Psychosom [Medline] 
       Van Ameringen M,  Allgulander C,  Bandelow B,  Greist JH,  Hollander E,  Montgomery SA, et al. WCA recommendations for the long-term treatment of social phobia.  CNS Spectr [Medline] 
       Practice guideline for the treatment of patients with panic disorder. Work Group on Panic Disorder. American Psychiatric Association.  Am J Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Pohl RB, Wolkow RM, Clary CM. Sertraline in the treatment of panic disorder: a double-blind multicenter trial.  Am J Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Michelson D,  Lydiard RB,  Pollack MH,  Tamura RN,  Hoog SL,  Tepner R, et al. Outcome assessment and clinical improvement in panic disorder: evidence from a randomized controlled trial of fluoxetine and placebo. The Fluoxetine Panic Disorder Study Group.  Am J Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Uhlenhuth EH, Balter MB, Ban TA, Yang K. International study of expert judgment on therapeutic use of benzodiazepines and other psychotherapeutic medications: VI. Trends in recommendations for the pharmacotherapy of anxiety disorders, 1992-1997.  Depress Anxiety [Medline] 
       Shear MK, Beidel DC. Psychotherapy in the overall management strategy for social anxiety disorder.  J Clin Psychiatry [Medline] 
       [Guideline] Mayor S. NICE advocates computerised CBT.  BMJ [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Barlow JH, Ellard DR, Hainsworth JM, Jones FR, Fisher A. A review of self-management interventions for panic disorders, phobias and obsessive-compulsive disorders.  Acta Psychiatr Scand [Medline] 
       Masia Warner C, Fisher PH, Shrout PE, Rathor S, Klein RG. Treating adolescents with social anxiety disorder in school: an attention control trial.  J Child Psychol Psychiatry [Medline] 
       Bunnell BE, Beidel DC, Mesa F. A Randomized Trial of Attention Training for Generalized Social Phobia: Does Attention Training Change Social Behavior?.  Behav Ther [Medline] 
       Ayala ES, Meuret AE, Ritz T. Treatments for blood-injury-injection phobia: a critical review of current evidence.  J Psychiatr Res [Medline] 
       Rothbaum BO, Anderson P, Zimand E, Hodges L, Lang D, Wilson J. Virtual reality exposure therapy and standard (in vivo) exposure therapy in the treatment of fear of flying.  Behav Ther [Medline] 
       Paquette V,  Lévesque J,  Mensour B,  Leroux JM,  Beaudoin G,  Bourgouin P, et al. "Change the mind and you change the brain": effects of cognitive-behavioral therapy on the neural correlates of spider phobia.  Neuroimage [Medline] 
       Schienle A, Schäfer A, Hermann A, Rohrmann S, Vaitl D. Symptom provocation and reduction in patients suffering from spider phobia: an fMRI study on exposure therapy.  Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci [Medline] 
       Sánchez-Meca J, Rosa-Alcázar AI, Marín-Martínez F, Gómez-Conesa A. Psychological treatment of panic disorder with or without agoraphobia: a meta-analysis.  Clin Psychol Rev [Medline] 
       Hudson C, Hudson S, MacKenzie J. Protein-source tryptophan as an efficacious treatment for social anxiety disorder: a pilot study.  Can J Physiol Pharmacol [Medline]

Article 25:

   
     Benign Positional Vertigo in Emergency Medicine 
       Benign Positional Vertigo in Emergency Medicine: Background, Pathophysiology, Epidemiology Benign Positional Vertigo in Emergency Medicine Clinical Presentation: History, Physical, Causes Benign Positional Vertigo in Emergency Medicine Differential Diagnoses Benign Positional Vertigo in Emergency Medicine Workup: Laboratory Studies, Imaging Studies, Other Tests Benign Positional Vertigo in Emergency Medicine Treatment & Management: Emergency Department Care, Consultations Benign Positional Vertigo in Emergency Medicine Medication: Antiemetic Agents, Antiemetics, Selective 5-HT3 Antagonist, Benzodiazepines Benign Positional Vertigo in Emergency Medicine Follow-up: Further Outpatient Care, Further Inpatient Care, Inpatient & Outpatient Medications 
       Benign Positional Vertigo in Emergency Medicine: Background, Pathophysiology, Epidemiology Benign Positional Vertigo in Emergency Medicine Clinical Presentation: History, Physical, Causes Benign Positional Vertigo in Emergency Medicine Differential Diagnoses Benign Positional Vertigo in Emergency Medicine Workup: Laboratory Studies, Imaging Studies, Other Tests Benign Positional Vertigo in Emergency Medicine Treatment & Management: Emergency Department Care, Consultations Benign Positional Vertigo in Emergency Medicine Medication: Antiemetic Agents, Antiemetics, Selective 5-HT3 Antagonist, Benzodiazepines Benign Positional Vertigo in Emergency Medicine Follow-up: Further Outpatient Care, Further Inpatient Care, Inpatient & Outpatient Medications 
       Overview
 Background Pathophysiology Epidemiology Presentation
 History Physical Causes Differential Diagnoses
 Workup
 Laboratory Studies Imaging Studies Other Tests Procedures Treatment
 Emergency Department Care Consultations Medication
 Follow-up
 Further Outpatient Care Further Inpatient Care Inpatient & Outpatient Medications Deterrence/Prevention Complications Prognosis Patient Education 
       Benign Positional Vertigo in Emergency Medicine Overview Benign Positional Vertigo in Emergency Medicine Clinical Presentation Benign Positional Vertigo in Emergency Medicine Differential Diagnoses Benign Positional Vertigo in Emergency Medicine Workup Benign Positional Vertigo in Emergency Medicine Treatment Benign Positional Vertigo in Emergency Medicine Medication Benign Positional Vertigo in Emergency Medicine Follow-up 791414-overview May 28, 2015 2015-08-04-21:54 0 Emergency Medicine 2002 Diseases & Conditions Condition 
       1 2 content 791414 502 45 ssg 
     Jun 05, 2015 
       condition Diseases & Conditions 
       emergency_medicine Emergency Medicine 
       emergency_medicine_neurology Neurology benign positional vertigo, benign paroxysmal positional vertigo, BPV, vertigo, dizziness, dizziness symptoms, dizziness treatment, inner ear, Hallpike test, Epley maneuver, lightheadedness, canalolithiasis theory, otoliths, Brandt exercise, Daroff exercise, near-syncope, dysequilibrium, disequilibrium, orthostatic hypotension, vasovagal episode, neurocardiogenic syncope, disorder of thevestibular proprioceptive system, labyrinthitis, vestibular neuronitis, nystagmus, torsional nystagmus, rotatory nystagmus, dizzy, head-hanging maneuvers, labyrinthine disease, otoconia, psychophysiologic dizziness Benign positional vertigo (BPV) is the most common cause of vertigo. Vertigo is an illusion of motion (an illusion is a misperception of a real stimulus) and represents a disorder of the vestibular proprioceptive system. 0 Benign Positional Vertigo in Emergency Medicine 
     Overview 
       Background 
         Benign positional vertigo (BPV) is the most common cause of vertigo. Vertigo is an illusion of motion (an illusion is a misperception of a real stimulus) and represents a disorder of the vestibular proprioceptive system.  BPV was first described by Adler in 1897 and then by Bárány in 1922; however, Dix and Hallpike did not coin the term  benign paroxysmal positional vertigo For further information, see  Benign Positional Vertigo 
       Pathophysiology 
         Benign positional vertigo (BPV) is caused by calcium carbonate particles called otoliths (or otoconia) that are inappropriately displaced into the semicircular canals of the vestibular labyrinth of the inner ear. These otoliths are normally attached to hair cells on a membrane inside the utricle and saccule. Because the otoliths are denser than the surrounding endolymph, changes in vertical head movement causes the otoliths to tilt the hair cells, which sends a signal to the brain letting the brain know that the head is tilting up or down.  The utricle is connected to the 3 semicircular canals. The otoliths may become displaced from the utricle by aging, head trauma, or labyrinthine disease. When this occurs, the otoliths have the potential to enter the semicircular canals. When they do, they usually enter the posterior semicircular canal because this is the most dependent (inferior) of the 3 canals. 
           Anatomy of the semicircular canals.  Anatomy of the semicircular canals.  According to the canalolithiasis theory (the most widely accepted theory of the pathophysiology of benign positional vertigo), the otoliths are free-floating within the semicircular canal. Changing head position causes the otoliths to move through the canal. Endolymph is dragged along with the movement of the otoliths, and this stimulates the hair cells of the cupula of the affected semicircular canal, causing vertigo. When the otoliths stop moving, the endolymph also stops moving and the hair cells return to their baseline position, thus terminating the vertigo and nystagmus. Reversing the head maneuver causes the particles to move in the opposite direction, producing nystagmus in the same axis but reversed in direction of rotation. The patient may describe that the room is now spinning in the opposite direction. When repeating the head maneuvers, the otoliths tend to become dispersed and thus are progressively less effective in producing the vertigo and nystagmus (hence, the concept of fatigability).  
       Epidemiology 
         Frequency 
           United States The incidence of benign positional vertigo (BPV) is 64 cases per 100,000 population per year (conservative estimate). [ 
           International One study in Japan found an incidence of 11 cases per 100,000 population per year, but patients were counted only if examined by a subspecialist or at a referral center.  
         Mortality/Morbidity The  B benign 
         Sex Women are affected twice as often as men. 
         Age BPV, in general, is a disease of elderly persons, although onset can occur at any age. Several large studies show an average age of onset in the mid 50s. Vertigo in young patients is more likely to be caused by labyrinthitis (associated with hearing loss) or vestibular neuronitis (normal hearing).  
     Clinical Presentation 
       History 
         When asked about their dizziness, patients with benign positional vertigo (BPV) characteristically describe that the room or world is spinning. However, other descriptions, such as rocking, tilting, somersaulting, and the like, are also possible. All that matters is that an illusion of motion is caused by a misperception of a stimulus (the otoliths). Diagnosis of BPV is based on a characteristic history and a positive Hallpike test.  Episodic vertigo may occur with the following head movements: 
           
             Rolling over in bed 
             Lying down 
             Sitting up 
             Leaning forward 
             Turning the head in a horizontal plane Symptoms of BPV are usually worse in the morning (the otoliths are more likely to clump together as the patient sleeps and exert a greater effect when the patient gets up in the morning) and mitigate as the day progresses (the otoliths become more dispersed with head movement).  Nausea is typically present (vomiting is less common). A history of head trauma may be present, especially in young patients with BPV. The head trauma may dislodge the otoliths off the hair cells within the utricle, allowing them the opportunity to enter the semicircular canals.  Eliciting that the individual episodes of vertigo in BPV last for seconds at a time is important. Patients may describe that they are having continuous vertigo, when in reality, they are having repeated episodes (with each episode typically lasting seconds or less than a minute). Patients with  vestibular neuritis labyrinthitis During the interview, if patient states that the "room is spinning" while the patient's head is still and prior to any manipulative tests, then it is highly unlikely that the patient has BPV because the vertigo in BPV lasts for seconds at a time and occurs only after head movement.  
       Physical 
         In addition to the patient's history, a diagnosis of benign positional vertigo (BPV) is confirmed by a positive Hallpike test (see video below). [ 
           Hallpike test. In this example, the right posterior semicircular canal is being tested. Note that the head extends over the edge of the gurney. The thumb can be used to help keep the eyelids open since noting the direction of the nystagmus is important.  In this test, the patient is placed in the head-hanging position after turning the head 45 degrees to one side. After a short delay of a few seconds, nystagmus and reproduction of the vertigo occurs and typically resolves within 30-60 seconds. In general, the Hallpike test will be positive on one side (the side with the otoliths in the posterior semicircular canal) and negative on the other side. The neurologic examination is otherwise unremarkable.  Nystagmus Classic nystagmus occurs when the patient's head is dependent and turned to the affected side. The nystagmus is torsional or rotatory. In the head-hanging position, the fast phase should beat toward the forehead (upbeat) and in the same direction as the affected side (ipsilateral). Although some describe the fast phase in terms of being clockwise or counterclockwise, most experts avoid this terminology because it can be unclear if the clock is being viewed from the patient's or physician's perspective.  Nystagmus usually occurs within 10 seconds after positioning but may present as late as 40 seconds. Hence, if the history is classic, observe the patient for at least 40 seconds while he or she is in the head-hanging position during the Hallpike test.  The duration of the observed nystagmus varies from a few seconds to a minute and parallels the sensation of vertigo. Response fatigues if the patient is repeatedly placed into the provoking position (due to dispersion of the otoliths). Note: If the patient has a classic history of BPV (after a short delay, the room spins, but then revolves in 20-30 seconds, and then the rooms spins in the opposite direction when he or she sits back up) but no nystagmus is seen during the Hallpike test, most experts would agree to treat the patient with the modified Epley maneuver because nystagmus may be blocked by fixation suppression and emergency physicians do not have access to Frenzel lenses that specialists use to block fixation suppression (see Treatment).  One study showed that treating such patients with the Epley maneuver is still effective (despite the lack of nystagmus). Again, these patients should have a classic history and be symptomatic during Hallpike testing.  Perform the Hallpike test as follows (Caution: For patients with cervical spondylosis, it may not be advisable to extend the neck. However, because having the head dependent is important, the same effect can be achieved if the gurney is placed in the Trendelenburg position for such patients). First, warn the patient that symptoms of vertigo will likely be reproduced but will resolve after a few seconds. Seat the patient close enough to the end of the gurney so that when he or she lies supine, the head can extend backward an additional 30-45°. Instruct the patient to keep his or her eyes open because you want to observe the direction of the nystagmus. The examiner may need to use his thumb to hold the eyelid open because patients may involuntarily close their eyes even when instructed to keep them open. To test the left posterior canal, follow these steps:  
           
             Turn the patient's head 45° to the left. This position orients the head such that the left posterior semicircular canal is going to be in the same plane as the upcoming head movement (next step). This is the most provocative way to move the otoliths (if they are indeed in the posterior semicircular canal) which will result in a positive test.  
             With your hands on either side of the patient's head, lay the patient down until the head is dependent (hanging over the edge of the gurney). Note that this step does not need to be performed rapidly.  
             Check for reproduction of symptoms and nystagmus. In most cases, the fast phase of the nystagmus should be upbeat (toward the forehead) and ipsilateral (in this example, toward the patient's left).  
             Return the patient to the upright position. Nystagmus may be observed in the opposite direction, and the patient may describe that the world is spinning in the opposite direction.  To test the right posterior canal, repeat the Hallpike test with the head turned 45° to the right side. In general, if the patient has BPV, only one side should test positive during the Hallpike test. Although having bilateral posterior semicircular canal BPV is possible, it is unlikely and should suggest horizontal canal involvement, vestibular neuritis/labyrinthitis, or a central cause.  Note that many patients experience mild dizziness when being brought up from the head-hanging position to the sitting position. It is important not to confuse this dizziness (which is more lightheaded in character) with true vertigo.  If the patient's head cannot be extended over the edge of the gurney, 2 additional options exist. The first is to place the patient in the Trendelenburg position if a gurney that allows this position is available. The other alternative is to use the side-lying test; the patient sits with his or her legs over one side of the gurney. To test the left posterior semicircular canal, turn the patient's head 90° to the opposite side (in this case, the right side). Then, lay the patient on his or her left side. By turning the patient's head to the right, the left posterior semicircular canal is aligned in the same plane as the sideways movement. As in the Hallpike test, this will allow the greatest chance for otoliths to move if they are indeed located in the posterior semicircular canal.  The neurologic examination findings should be otherwise normal; if not, strongly consider alternative diagnoses. 
       Causes 
         Several disorders affecting the peripheral vestibular system may precede the onset of benign positional vertigo (BPV). 
           
             Idiopathic (50-60%) 
             Infection (viral neuronitis) 
             Head trauma, especially in younger patients 
             Degeneration of the peripheral end organ 
             Surgical damage to the labyrinth 
     Differential Diagnoses 
       Diagnostic Considerations Acoustic schwannoma Chronic otomastoiditis Congenital malformation (inner ear) Medications (alcohol, phenytoin, diuretics, salicylates, quinidine, quinine, barbiturates, antibiotics) Otosclerosis Ototoxicity Polyarteritis nodosa Posttraumatic injuries Posterior fossa neurosurgery Postsurgery (general) Postsurgery (ear) Vertebrobasilar insufficiency 
       
         Labyrinthitis 
         Meniere Disease (Idiopathic Endolymphatic Hydrops) 
         Migraine Headache 
         Multiple Sclerosis 
         Stroke, Hemorrhagic 
         Stroke, Ischemic 
         Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE) 
         Vestibular Neuronitis 
     Workup 
       Laboratory Studies 
         No pathognomonic laboratory test for benign positional vertigo (BPV) exists. Laboratory tests may be performed to rule out other pathology.  
       Imaging Studies 
         Currently, no imaging study can demonstrate the presence of otoliths. Head CT scanning or MRI is indicated if the diagnosis is in doubt. 
       Other Tests 
         Although most patients with benign positional vertigo (BPV) have posterior semicircular canal involvement, some patients have horizontal canal involvement. This canal should be suspected if the patient has bilateral symptoms during the Hallpike test. Use the Roll test to formally diagnose horizontal canal BPV, and use the bar-b-que treatment to treat horizontal canal BPV.  
         Roll test Have the patient lie in the supine position on the gurney. Unlike the Hallpike test, the head does not need to hang over the edge of the gurney. Turn the patient's head 90° to one side. The patient should experience a reproduction of symptoms and the presence of horizontal nystagmus. The fast phase should beat toward the earth (geotropic). Now, turn the patient's head 180° (or 90° to the opposite side). The patient should again experience a reproduction of symptoms and the presence of horizontal nystagmus. The fast phase again beats toward the earth (note that it has changed direction). This is known as direction-changing nystagmus (nystagmus that changes direction based on turning the head) and is different from gaze-evoked nystagmus (which is nystagmus that changes direction depending on where the patient is looking, as in Dilantin toxicity).  Note that both sides will have nystagmus and a reproduction of symptoms, but one side will be much more symptomatic (and demonstrate stronger nystagmus) than the other side. This is considered the involved side.  A positive Roll test should be treated with the bar-b-que treatment (see Treatment and the video below). 
           Bar-b-que maneuver. This maneuver is used to treat horizontal canal benign positional vertigo. In this example, the right horizontal canal is being treated. Each position should be held at least 20-30 seconds.  
         Head-thrust test (head-impulse test) The head-thrust test is used to diagnose vestibular neuritis and labyrinthitis.  In this test, the patient is told to look at the examiner's nose. The examiner places both his or her hands on the patient's head and rapidly turns it approximately 10-15° to one side. If the vestibular apparatus is functioning properly, the patient will be able to maintain his or her focus on the examiner's nose. If the vestibular apparatus is not working properly, the patient's eyes will deviate to the side and then quickly jerk back to view the examiner's nose. This jerking eye movement is called a saccade and indicates a positive head-thrust test. As a general rule, a positive head-thrust test rules in a peripheral (and hence benign) cause of vertigo. There are reported cases, however, of positive head-thrust tests in central causes of vertigo.  
       Procedures 
         The Hallpike test, along with the patient's history, confirms the diagnosis of BPV. See Physical for details of this procedure.  The modified Epley maneuver is used to treat posterior canal BPV (see Treatment as well as the video below for a demonstration). [ 
           Epley maneuver. In this example, the left posterior semicircular canal is being treated. In this clip, the maneuvers are performed quickly. In a real patient, each position should be held for at least 30 seconds or until resolution of the nystagmus and vertigo.  
     Treatment & Management 
       Emergency Department Care 
         If the history and physical examination are typical, no further evaluation is necessary, and the emergency physician may proceed with the modified Epley maneuver described below (see the video below). 
           Epley maneuver. In this example, the left posterior semicircular canal is being treated. In this clip, the maneuvers are performed quickly. In a real patient, each position should be held for at least 30 seconds or until resolution of the nystagmus and vertigo.  If the history and physical examination findings are atypical, consider other causes of positional vertigo, which may occur with tumor or infarcts in the posterior fossa. Contraindications to performing the Epley maneuver include ongoing CNS disease (ie,  stroke transient ischemic attack Further information on diagnosis and treatment guidelines and recommendations are available from the American Academy of Neurology and the American Academy of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery Foundation. [ The goal of the Epley maneuver is to move the otoliths out of the posterior semicircular canal and back into the utricle where they belong.  The success rate of the Epley maneuver is approximately 80%. When it fails, it is the author's experience that it is either being incorrectly applied to patients with vestibular neuritis or labyrinthitis, or that the patient raised his/her head too high in the 3 rd 
         Epley maneuver, general guidelines The head must be in the dependent (head-hanging) position for this maneuver to work. If the patient does not tolerate this position, put the gurney in the Trendelenburg position to simulate this head-hanging position. [ Maintain each position until the symptoms and nystagmus have disappeared or for at least 30 seconds. If the patient cannot tolerate the maneuver because of vomiting or severity of the vertigo, premedicate with a vestibular sedative, such as 4 mg IV ondansetron (Zofran).  
         Epley maneuver steps Have the patient sit upright on the gurney with the head turned 45° to the affected side. Recall that the affected side was predetermined by using the Hallpike test. Make sure the patient is sitting far enough back in the gurney so that the head will hang over the edge of the gurney when the patient is laid back. Make sure the guardrail on the opposite side has been lowered (the patient will eventually sit up so his or her legs overhang the edge of the gurney). See the image below. 
           Epley maneuver. Move the patient back in the gurney such that when he lies down, his or her head... Epley maneuver. Move the patient back in the gurney such that when he lies down, his or her head will hang over the edge of the gurney. Emphasize to the patient to keep his or her eyes open during each position so that nystagmus can be observed. Lower the guardrails of the gurney on the opposite side from which the patient's head is turned.  Place your hands on either side of the patient's head and guide the patient down with the head dependent (as in the Hallpike test). See the image below. 
           Epley maneuver. Turn the patient's head 45° to the side that had the most prominent symptoms... Epley maneuver. Turn the patient's head 45° to the side that had the most prominent symptoms during the Hallpike test. In this example, the patient's head is turned 45° to the left. With both hands holding the patient's head, gently lay the patient down in the supine position with the head hanging over the edge of the bed. Note: Each maneuver does not need to be performed rapidly. The Epley maneuver is positional, not positioning.  Rotate the head 90° to the opposite side with the patient's face upward and be sure to maintain the head-dependent position (head is hanging over the edge of the gurney). Ask the patient to roll onto his or her side while holding the head in this position and then rotate the head so that it is facing downward (tell the patient to look to the ground). See the images below. 
           Epley maneuver. Ask the patient to turn onto his or her shoulder.  Epley maneuver. Ask the patient to turn onto his or her shoulder.  
           Epley maneuver. Guide the patient's head down so that he or she is looking at the ground. Again... Epley maneuver. Guide the patient's head down so that he or she is looking at the ground. Again, wait for at least 30 seconds.  Raise the patient to a sitting position while maintaining head rotation (This author finds that sitting the patient up so that he or she is sitting with his or her legs hanging over the edge of the gurney is easier. This is why the side guardrails need to be lowered before the procedure is started). See the images below. 
           Epley maneuver. The patient's head needs to be regripped again. Then, the patient needs to sit... Epley maneuver. The patient's head needs to be regripped again. Then, the patient needs to sit up with the legs hanging over the side of the gurney (which is why the guardrails need to be lowered before the start of the procedure).  
           Epley maneuver. The patient is now sitting upright.  Epley maneuver. The patient is now sitting upright.  Simultaneously rotate the head to a central position and move it 45° forward. 
         The Semont maneuver (liberatory maneuver) This maneuver is primarily used in Europe. Although it can be used to treat classic posterior canal BPV, in the United States, it is usually reserved to treat the cupulolithiasis form of BPV (where the otoliths are not free-floating but instead are attached to the cupula of the posterior semicircular canal). Because of its somewhat violent nature (and the fact that most patients with BPV are elderly), the author does not advocate its use but includes it to be complete. As in the side-lying test, the patient sits on the edge of the gurney with the head turned opposite to the involved side. The patient is brought rapidly down onto his or her side (this serves to dislodge the otoliths off the cupula). The patient is then rapidly brought to the other side, maintaining the head in the same position (so the patient's face will be facing the gurney). The patient is then brought to the original sitting position. See the video below. 
           Semont maneuver. Generally reserved for the cupulolithiasis form of benign positional vertigo, in which the otoliths are attached to the cupula of the semicircular canal. This maneuver has to be performed rapidly to be effective, and it is not recommended in elderly persons. In this example, the right posterior semicircular canal is being treated.  
       Consultations 
         Neurologic consultation is indicated for cases of positional vertigo and nystagmus that do not satisfy criteria for BPV. For example, downbeat (fast phase beating towards the feet) nystagmus is more likely to indicate a central cause of vertigo as opposed to peripheral vertigo caused by anterior semicircular canal involvement, the latter of which is extremely rare.  
     Medication 
       Medication Summary Medical treatment for benign positional vertigo (BPV) is generally ineffective but may be used to lessen the symptoms. [ The use of vestibular suppressants is based on the sensory conflict theory, in which sensory input is compared from different systems, and if a conflict exists, then vertigo, nausea, and vomiting result. Over time, habituation occurs. Several main neurotransmitters mediate these functions: GABA, acetylcholine, and histamine/serotonin.  
       Antiemetic Agents 
         Class Summary The antihistaminic antiemetics block the emetic response. For patients with severe vertigo or vomiting, intravenous promethazine (Phenergan) used to be the drug of choice; however, this medication recently received a Black Box Warning from the FDA and is now only recommended to be given intramuscularly. Prochlorperazine (Compazine) is an alternative antiemetic. Meclizine is given orally and does not work fast enough to be effective acutely. Most antiemetics have anticholinergic activity as well. 
         Promethazine (Phenergan, Anergan, Prorex) Antidopaminergic agent used to treat emesis. Blocks postsynaptic mesolimbic dopaminergic receptors in the brain and reduces stimuli to brainstem reticular system. Also has cross reactivity with the cholinergic receptors.  
         Meclizine (Antivert, Antrizine, Dramamine) Decreases excitability of middle ear labyrinth and blocks conduction in middle ear vestibular-cerebellar pathways. These effects are associated with relief of nausea and vomiting.  
         Scopolamine (Isopto, Scopace Tablet) Blocks action of acetylcholine at parasympathetic sites in the smooth muscle, secretory glands, and CNS. Antagonizes histamine and serotonin action. Transdermal scopolamine may be most effective agent for motion sickness. Use in the treatment of BPV is limited by slow onset of action.  
         Dimenhydrinate (Dimetabs, Dramamine) Mixture of 1:1 salt consisting of 8-chlorotheophylline and diphenhydramine. Believed to be useful, particularly in treatment of vertigo. Diminishes vestibular stimulation and depresses labyrinthine function through central anticholinergic effects. However, prolonged treatment may decrease rate of recovery of vestibular injuries.  
       Antiemetics, Selective 5-HT3 Antagonist 
         Class Summary These agents are an option for treating emesis associated with BPV. They may be administered IV, IM, or orally, including an orally disintegrating tablet and oral soluble film.  
         Ondansetron (Zofran, Zofran ODT, Zuplenz) Ondansetron selective 5-HT3 receptor antagonist; binds to 5-HT3 receptors both in periphery and in CNS, with primary effects in GI tract. It has no effect on dopamine receptors and therefore does not cause extrapyramidal symptoms.  
       Benzodiazepines 
         Class Summary These agents block the GABA receptors and serve as the "brakes" to the system. Although they can be used acutely in the ED, they are not recommended for long-term use because they interfere with the process of vestibular rehabilitation.  
         Lorazepam (Ativan) Sedative hypnotic in benzodiazepine class that has short time to onset and relatively long half-life. Depresses all levels of CNS, including limbic and reticular formation, probably through increased action of GABA, a major inhibitory neurotransmitter.  
     Follow-up 
       Further Outpatient Care 
         Head exercise therapy (positional exercises of Brandt and Daroff) that promotes central accommodation may be helpful for BPV, although most patients have difficulty tolerating these maneuvers. The patient can perform the following therapy: 
           
             Sit on the edge of the bed near the middle, with legs hanging down. 
             Turn the head 45° to the right side. Quickly lie down on the left side, with the head still turned, and touch the bed with a portion of the head behind the ear.  
             Maintain this position and every subsequent position for about 30 seconds. 
             Sit up again. 
             Quickly lie down to the right side after turning head 45° toward the left side. 
             Sit up again. 
             Do 6-10 repetitions, 3 times per day. 
             If the patient becomes confused about the direction to turn his or her head, tell the patient his or her nose should always point toward the ceiling.  
       Further Inpatient Care 
         Patients with persistent vomiting or intractable vertigo may require admission for hydration and vestibular suppressant medication. Surgical elimination of posterior canal function is restricted to rare cases of long-standing refractory benign positional vertigo (BPV).  
       Inpatient & Outpatient Medications 
         Meclizine is the most common outpatient medication. This medication is indicated for vertigo but should not be given for other categories of dizziness (near-syncope, dysequilibrium, or lightheadedness).  
       Deterrence/Prevention 
         Avoid provocative movements and limit activities. 
       Complications 
         No complications (eg, neck injury, vertebral dissection) other than vomiting have been reported from the use of the Epley maneuver.  
       Prognosis 
         Benign positional vertigo (BPV) tends to resolve spontaneously after several days or weeks. An Italian researcher removed the otoliths from an animal, placed them in a Petri dish full of endolymph, and noted that the otoliths dissolved in approximately 100 hours.  Patients may experience recurrences months or years later (if the otoliths got out once, they can do it again). Variants range from a single, short-lived episode to decades of vertigo with only short remissions. A study by Kim et al assessed patients who were discharged home from the ED with a diagnosis of isolated dizziness or vertigo and determined that stroke occurs in less than 1 in 500 patients within the first month. [ 
       Patient Education 
         See the list below: 
           
             For excellent patient education resources, visit eMedicine's  Brain and Nervous System Center Benign Positional Vertigo 
     start media 
       
         Anatomy of the semicircular canals.  Anatomy of the semicircular canals.  
       
         Epley maneuver. Move the patient back in the gurney such that when he lies down, his or her head... Epley maneuver. Move the patient back in the gurney such that when he lies down, his or her head will hang over the edge of the gurney. Emphasize to the patient to keep his or her eyes open during each position so that nystagmus can be observed. Lower the guardrails of the gurney on the opposite side from which the patient's head is turned.  
       
         Epley maneuver. Turn the patient's head 45° to the side that had the most prominent symptoms... Epley maneuver. Turn the patient's head 45° to the side that had the most prominent symptoms during the Hallpike test. In this example, the patient's head is turned 45° to the left. With both hands holding the patient's head, gently lay the patient down in the supine position with the head hanging over the edge of the bed. Note: Each maneuver does not need to be performed rapidly. The Epley maneuver is positional, not positioning.  
       
         Epley maneuver. The patient's head should be at 45° and hanging off the edge of the bed. Observe... Epley maneuver. The patient's head should be at 45° and hanging off the edge of the bed. Observe the patient's eyes and look for torsional nystagmus. Keep the patient in this position for at least 30 seconds or until the nystagmus or symptoms resolve.  
       
         Epley maneuver. Because the patient's head will be turned 90° in the other direction, the... Epley maneuver. Because the patient's head will be turned 90° in the other direction, the physician needs to move to the head of the gurney and regrip the patient's head so that the fingers are pointing toward the patient's feet.  
       
         Epley maneuver. Turn the patient's head 90° in the opposite direction (in this case, the patient... Epley maneuver. Turn the patient's head 90° in the opposite direction (in this case, the patient's head is now facing to the right). Again, observe for nystagmus and hold this position for at least 30 seconds or until nystagmus or symptoms resolve.  
       
         Epley maneuver. Close-up view of step shown in Media file 6.  Epley maneuver. Close-up view of step shown in Media file 6.  
       
         Epley maneuver. Ask the patient to turn onto his or her shoulder.  Epley maneuver. Ask the patient to turn onto his or her shoulder.  
       
         Epley maneuver. Guide the patient's head down so that he or she is looking at the ground. Again... Epley maneuver. Guide the patient's head down so that he or she is looking at the ground. Again, wait for at least 30 seconds.  
       
         Epley maneuver. Close-up of view shown in Media file 9.  Epley maneuver. Close-up of view shown in Media file 9.  
       
         Epley maneuver. The patient's head needs to be regripped again. Then, the patient needs to sit... Epley maneuver. The patient's head needs to be regripped again. Then, the patient needs to sit up with the legs hanging over the side of the gurney (which is why the guardrails need to be lowered before the start of the procedure).  
       
         Epley maneuver. The patient is now sitting upright.  Epley maneuver. The patient is now sitting upright.  
       
         Epley maneuver. Move the patient's head slightly forward. This completes the Epley maneuver. The... Epley maneuver. Move the patient's head slightly forward. This completes the Epley maneuver. The maneuver may be performed multiple times.  
       
         Hallpike test. In this example, the right posterior semicircular canal is being tested. Note that the head extends over the edge of the gurney. The thumb can be used to help keep the eyelids open since noting the direction of the nystagmus is important.  
       
         Epley maneuver. In this example, the left posterior semicircular canal is being treated. In this clip, the maneuvers are performed quickly. In a real patient, each position should be held for at least 30 seconds or until resolution of the nystagmus and vertigo.  
       
         Semont maneuver. Generally reserved for the cupulolithiasis form of benign positional vertigo, in which the otoliths are attached to the cupula of the semicircular canal. This maneuver has to be performed rapidly to be effective, and it is not recommended in elderly persons. In this example, the right posterior semicircular canal is being treated.  
       
         Bar-b-que maneuver. This maneuver is used to treat horizontal canal benign positional vertigo. In this example, the right horizontal canal is being treated. Each position should be held at least 20-30 seconds.  
     
       Author 
         Andrew K Chang, MD Associate Professor, Department of Emergency Medicine, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Montefiore Medical Center Andrew K Chang, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American Academy of Emergency Medicine American Academy of Neurology American College of Emergency Physicians Society for Academic Emergency Medicine Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Pharmacy Editor 
         Francisco Talavera, PharmD, PhD Adjunct Assistant Professor, University of Nebraska Medical Center College of Pharmacy; Editor-in-Chief, Medscape Drug Reference Disclosure: Received salary from Medscape for employment. for: Medscape. 
       Managing Editor 
         J Stephen Huff, MD, FACEP Professor of Emergency Medicine and Neurology, Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Virginia School of Medicine J Stephen Huff, MD, FACEP is a member of the following medical societies:  American Academy of Neurology American College of Emergency Physicians Society for Academic Emergency Medicine Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Chief Editor 
         Robert E O'Connor, MD, MPH Professor and Chair, Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Virginia Health System Robert E O'Connor, MD, MPH is a member of the following medical societies:  American Academy of Emergency Medicine American College of Emergency Physicians American Association for Physician Leadership American Heart Association Medical Society of Delaware Society for Academic Emergency Medicine Wilderness Medical Society American Medical Association National Association of EMS Physicians Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Additional Contributors 
         Edward Bessman, MD, MBA Chairman and Clinical Director, Department of Emergency Medicine, John Hopkins Bayview Medical Center; Assistant Professor, Department of Emergency Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine Edward Bessman, MD, MBA is a member of the following medical societies:  American Academy of Emergency Medicine American College of Emergency Physicians Society for Academic Emergency Medicine Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
     
       Froehling DA, Silverstein MD, Mohr DN, Beatty CW, Offord KP, Ballard DJ. Benign positional vertigo: incidence and prognosis in a population-based study in Olmsted County, Minnesota.  Mayo Clin Proc [Medline] 
       [Guideline] Bhattacharyya N,  Baugh RF,  Orvidas L,  Barrs D,  Bronston LJ,  Cass S, et al. Clinical practice guideline: benign paroxysmal positional vertigo.  Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Furman JM, Cass SP. Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo.  N Engl J Med [Medline] 
       Hilton MP, Pinder DK. The Epley (canalith repositioning) manoeuvre for benign paroxysmal positional vertigo.  Cochrane Database Syst Rev [Medline] 
       [Guideline] Fife TD,  Iverson DJ,  Lempert T,  Furman JM,  Baloh RW,  Tusa RJ, et al. Practice parameter: therapies for benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (an evidence-based review): report of the Quality Standards Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology.  Neurology [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Epley JM. Particle repositioning for benign paroxysmal positional vertigo.  Otolaryngol Clin North Am [Medline] 
       Kim AS, Fullerton HJ, Johnston SC. Risk of vascular events in emergency department patients discharged home with diagnosis of dizziness or vertigo.  Ann Emerg Med [Medline] 
       Baloh RW. Dizziness and vertigo. Samuels MA, Feske S.  Office Practice of Neurology 
       Brandt T, Daroff RB. Physical therapy for benign paroxysmal positional vertigo.  Arch Otolaryngol [Medline] 
       Chang AK, Schoeman G, Hill M. A randomized clinical trial to assess the efficacy of the Epley maneuver in the treatment of acute benign positional vertigo.  Acad Emerg Med [Medline] 
       Froehling DA, Bowen JM, Mohr DN, et al. The canalith repositioning procedure for the treatment of benign paroxysmal positional vertigo: a randomized controlled trial.  Mayo Clin Proc [Medline] 
       Kim JS, Zee DS. Clinical practice. Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo.  N Engl J Med [Medline] 
       Lempert T, Gresty MA, Bronstein AM. Benign positional vertigo: recognition and treatment.  BMJ [Medline] 
       Marill KA, Walsh MJ, Nelson BK. Intravenous Lorazepam versus dimenhydrinate for treatment of vertigo in  the emergency department: a randomized clinical trial.  Ann Emerg Med [Medline] 
       Massoud EA, Ireland DJ. Post-treatment instructions in the nonsurgical management of benign paroxysmal positional vertigo.  J Otolaryngol [Medline] 
       Troost BT, Patton JM. Exercise therapy for positional vertigo.  Neurology [Medline]

Article 26:

   
     Cleft Lip and Palate and Mouth and Pharynx Deformities 
       Cleft Lip and Palate and Mouth and Pharynx Deformities: Overview, Embryology of Cleft Lip and Palate, Classification of Cleft Lip and Palate 
       Cleft Lip and Palate and Mouth and Pharynx Deformities: Overview, Embryology of Cleft Lip and Palate, Classification of Cleft Lip and Palate 
       Overview Overview Embryology of Cleft Lip and Palate Classification of Cleft Lip and Palate Functional Anatomy of Cleft Lip Palate Management of Cleft Lip and Palate Velopharyngeal Insufficiency Selected Mouth and Pharynx Deformities 
       Cleft Lip and Palate and Mouth and Pharynx Deformities Overview 837347-overview Apr 17, 2015 2015-08-04-18:47 1 Otolaryngology and Facial Plastic Surgery 2002 Procedures Procedure 
       1 2 content 837347 503 6000001 48 ssg 
     Jun 04, 2015 
       procedure Procedures 
       otolaryngology Otolaryngology and Facial Plastic Surgery 
       otolaryngology_congenital Congenital Malformations Of The Head And Neck cleft lip, cleft palate, congenital, mouth malformations, pharynx malformations, cleft palate repair, cleft lip repair, mouth, pharynx, congenital malformations, mouth deformities, cleft lip and palate, velopharyngeal insufficiency, VPI, Robin sequence, macroglossia, ankyloglossia, epignathus, lingual thyroid, lip pits, commissural lip pits, van der Woude syndrome, micrognathia This article primarily reviews cleft lip and palate (CLP) and issues directly related to these anomalies, including secondary deformities and velopharyngeal insufficiency (VPI). Cleft lip and palate deformity can be distinguished from an isolated cleft palate (CP) on the basis of epidemiologic, embryonic, and genetic factors. 0 Cleft Lip and Palate and Mouth and Pharynx Deformities 
     Overview 
       This article primarily reviews cleft lip and palate (CLP) and issues directly related to these anomalies, including secondary deformities and  velopharyngeal insufficiency [ The scope of this field precludes in-depth discussion of surgical techniques and controversies. Miscellaneous deformities, such as the Robin sequence, macroglossia, ankyloglossia, and epignathus are briefly highlighted.  The image below depicts embryonic formation of the primary palate. 
         Illustration depicts fusion of the lateral nasal, medial nasal, and maxillary prominences to... Illustration depicts fusion of the lateral nasal, medial nasal, and maxillary prominences to form the primary palate.  Two thirds of all cases of clefting involve the lip with or without involvement of the palate, whereas one third of all cases occur as an isolated deformity of the palate. Males predominate within the cleft lip and palate (CLP) group (60-80% of cases), whereas females constitute the majority within the cleft palate (CP) group. Cleft lip and palate deformity is strongly associated with bilateral cleft lips (CLs) (86% of cases); the association decreases to 68% with unilateral cleft lip. The left side is most commonly involved in unilateral cleft lip cases.  Interracial differences exist in the incidence of cleft lip and palate versus cleft palate. The mean incidence of cleft lip and palate is 2.1 cases per 1000 live births among Asians, 1 case per 1000 live births among white people, and 0.41 cases per 1000 live births among black people. A high incidence of the cleft lip and palate is seen in North American populations of Asian descent, such as Indians of the southwestern United States and the west coast of Canada. The incidence of isolated cleft palate is constant among the 3 racial groups at 0.5 cases per 1000 live births.  The incidence of cleft lip and palate also rises with increased parental age, and older mothers with additional parity have an increased incidence of having children with cleft palate.  In relatives of children with cleft lip and palate, the incidence of cleft lip and palate is significantly increased. However, the isolated cleft palate anomaly occurs with the same frequency as that in the general population. Relatives of children with isolated cleft palate also have a higher risk of this anomaly, without an increased risk of the cleft lip and palate deformity.  Overall, 5% of patients with cleft lip and palate and isolated cleft palate have identifiable syndromes. Associated syndromes are more common among patients with isolated cleft palate than among others.  The following image depicts the normal palate anatomy. 
         Normal anatomy of the palate.  Normal anatomy of the palate.  Go to  Cleft Lip Bilateral Cleft Lip Repair Cleft Palate Repair Unilateral Cleft Lip Repair 
     Embryology of Cleft Lip and Palate 
       The overall development of the palate involves the formation of the primary palate followed by the formation of the secondary palate.At approximately 30-37 days' gestational age (GA), the primary palate forms by the growth and fusion of the medial nasal, lateral nasal, and maxillary processes (see the image below). The maxillary process, derived from the proximal half of the first arch, grows to meet and fuse with the nasal processes that have grown and moved in association with the olfactory placode. General opinion holds that mesodermal penetration underlies the formation of the primary palate. Mesodermal reinforcement along lines of fusion is important, as epithelial breakdown and clefting is thought to result from the lack of reinforcement. 
         Illustration depicts fusion of the lateral nasal, medial nasal, and maxillary prominences to... Illustration depicts fusion of the lateral nasal, medial nasal, and maxillary prominences to form the primary palate.  The secondary palate arises from the 2 palatal shelves, which are initially are in a vertical position because of the interposed tongue. With extension of the head at 7 weeks' GA and mandibular growth, the tongue is withdrawn, and the palatal shelves can swing into a more horizontal and midline position for fusion and formation of a hard and soft palate (see the following image). The cleft of the hard palate and soft palate is thought to occur because of the intervening tongue, which impedes elevation of the palatal shelves. 
         Formation of the secondary palate.  Formation of the secondary palate.  
     Classification of Cleft Lip and Palate 
       Various classification schemes have been devised in the last 70 years for cleft lip and palate, but few have received widespread clinical acceptance. Four of the more accepted schemes are highlighted below.  
       Davis and Ritchie classification The Davis and Ritchie classification divides cleft lip and palate into 2 groups, which subdivided into the extent of the cleft (eg, 1/3, 1/2), as follows:  
         
           Group I - Clefts anterior to the alveolus (unilateral, median, or bilateral cleft lip) 
           Group II - Postalveolar clefts (cleft palate alone, soft palate alone, soft palate and hard palate, or submucous cleft) 
       Veau classification The Veau classification system divides the cleft lip and palate into 4 groups, which are as follows and illustrated in the image below:  
         
           Group I – Defects of the soft palate only 
           Group II – Defects involving the hard palate and soft palate 
           Group III – Defects involving the soft palate to the alveolus, usually involving the lip 
           Group IV – Complete bilateral clefts 
             Veau classification of cleft lip and palate. A: Group I. Defects of the soft palate only. B:... Veau classification of cleft lip and palate. A: Group I. Defects of the soft palate only. B: Group II. Defects involving the hard palate and soft palate. C: Group III. Defects involving the soft palate to the alveolus, usually involving the lip. D: Group IV. Complete bilateral clefts.  
       Kernahan and Stark symbolic classification The Kernahan and Stark classification highlights the anatomic and embryonic importance of the incisive foramen that is formed during weeks 4-7 gestational age (GA). The secondary palate forms the roof of the mouth from the incisive foramen to the uvula during weeks 7-12 GA (see the image below). 
         Formation of the secondary palate.  Formation of the secondary palate.  This system provides a graphic classification scheme using a Y-configuration, which can be divided into 9 areas, as follows (see also the image below) [ 
         
           Areas 1 and 4 – Lip 
           Areas 2 and 5 – Alveolus 
           Areas 3 and 6 – Palate between the alveolus and the incisive foramen 
           Areas 7 and 8 – Hard palate 
           Area 9 – Soft palate 
             Kernahan and Stark symbolic classification of cleft lip and palate. R = right; L = left.  Kernahan and Stark symbolic classification of cleft lip and palate. R = right; L = left.  
       International Confederation of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery classification The International Confederation of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery classification system uses an embryonic framework to divide clefts into 3 groups, with further subdivisions to denote unilateral or bilateral cases, as follows:  
         
           Group I – Defects of the lip or alveolus 
           Group II – Clefts of the secondary palate (hard palate, soft palate, or both) 
           Group III – Any combination of clefts involving the primary and secondary palates Koul introduced a method for documenting all types of cleft lip and cleft palate for data storage and communication. [ 
     Functional Anatomy of Cleft Lip Palate 
       Comprehension of the anatomic deformities is central to understanding the principles of their surgical repair. The following section briefly describes the anatomic abnormalities in the patient with cleft lip and palate (CLP) by discussing the muscular, neurovascular, structural, and nasal deformities.  Failure of the muscles to meet their counterparts during embryonic development leads to the functional abnormalities of clefts of the lip and palate. [ [ 
       Cleft lip The orbicularis oris muscle is the primary muscle of the lip and can be divided functionally and anatomically into 2 parts (see the image below). [ 
         Muscular defects in unilateral deformity.  Muscular defects in unilateral deformity.  In a complete cleft lip (CL), the deep fibers of the orbicularis oris muscle are interrupted by the cleft and end on either side of the defect instead of making their way around the mouth. In addition, the superficial component of the orbicularis oris turns upward, along the margins of the cleft and ends beneath the ala or columella. [ Incomplete cleft lip behaves in a similar manner, except when the cleft is less than two thirds of the height of the lip. [ The blood vessels parallel the course of the muscle fibers and run along the margins of the cleft toward the columella or alar base, where they form anastomoses with nearby vessels.  In the bilateral deformity, the anatomic characteristics are determined by the degree of completeness of the cleft and its symmetry. The cleft may involve the primary palate alone or in conjunction with the secondary palate. Although the prolabium varies in size, it is usually retracted and lacks muscle fibers. In addition, the columella is absent and the prolabium appears attached to the top of the nose in some cases. The size and position of the premaxilla vary and effectively can be excluded with a collapse of the alveolar arch.  The extent of nasal deformity associated with cleft lip varies from patient to patient, although it has a characteristic appearance, with the following features:  
         
           Deflection of the nasal tip towards the noncleft side 
           Retroplacement of the cleft alar cartilage dome 
           Obtuse angle between the medial and lateral crura of the lower lateral cartilage on the cleft side 
           Buckling of the ala on the cleft side 
           Absence of the alar-facial groove on the cleft side and attachment of the ala to the face at an obtuse angle 
           Apparent or real bony deficiency of the maxilla on the cleft side 
           Larger nares on the cleft side 
           Shorter columella on the cleft side, positioning the entire columella at a slant toward the noncleft side 
           Inferior displacement of the medial crus within the columella 
           Dislocation of the caudal portion of the septum to the noncleft side from the nasal spine 
           Downward rotation of the alar cartilage on the cleft side 
           Bilateral deformity in which the nasal tip appears large, flat, and bifid, because both alae are rotated downward and spread apart  
       Cleft palate The incisive foramen is the key landmark in the bony palate (see the image below). The premaxilla lies anterior to the incisive foramen and includes the 2 premaxillary bones: the alveolus and the incisors. 
         Normal anatomy of the palate.  Normal anatomy of the palate.  The soft-tissue structures in the primary palate include the nasal tip and the upper central lip. The size, composition, and configuration of the premaxilla can vary from full development with the complement of teeth (4 primary and 4 secondary) to underdevelopment with only 2 incisors. If the premaxilla is unrestrained in the intrauterine and neonatal period it can protrude from the arch; the maxillary arches may then collapse and potentially exclude the premaxilla from the arch.  Posterior to the incisive foramen lies the secondary palate, comprising the hard palate and soft palate. The hard palate forms from the palatine processes of the maxilla anteriorly and the palatine bones posteriorly. Posterior to the bony hard palate lies the soft palate.  The soft palate plays an important role in speech and swallowing. Paired muscle on both sides of the midline (see the following image) form the musculature of the soft palate. The levator veli palatini is the most important muscle for the production of speech and velopharyngeal competence. The paired muscles of the soft palate function as a sling from their origin at the undersurface of the temporal bone to their aponeurosis across the midline, as they elevate the soft palate toward the posterior pharyngeal wall.  The palatopharyngeus further supplements the posterior movement of the soft palate. Contraction of the superior pharyngeal constrictor contributes to closure of the velopharyngeal opening at the lateral and posterior pharyngeal wall. The primary function of the tensor veli palatini is to dilate the eustachian tube and to maintain its integrity. The uvular muscle is thought to have a minimal contribution to normal speech. 
         Muscles of the soft palate.  Muscles of the soft palate.  Clefts of the palate (CPs) are associated with bony, as well as soft-tissue, abnormalities. Clefts of the secondary palate may be isolated or associated with clefts of the primary palate. Although clefts of the secondary palate are midline defects (see the image below), those involving the primary palate are usually asymmetric, with the vomer attached to the noncleft side. The dental arch on the noncleft side usually splays outward due to the lack of restraining force from the lip, and the palate is foreshortened in the anteroposterior direction. In the case of complete bilateral clefts, the entire premaxilla protrudes from the adjacent alveolar ridges. Because of the collapse of the palatine shelves posterior to the premaxilla and its possible rotation, the premaxilla is prevented from rejoining the arch and is left attached solely to the vomer. 
         Variations of cleft palate.  Variations of cleft palate.  Soft-tissue defects of the cleft palate include hypoplasia of the velar musculature in addition to anomalous insertions of its muscular components (see the following image). The normal midline insertion and transverse orientation of the levator palatini is substituted by an aberrant longitudinal orientation and insertion along the bony cleft margin and posterior palatine bones. Other palatal muscles are affected similarly. Dysfunction results in speech pathology with velopharyngeal incompetence and in eustachian-tube obstruction with resultant middle-ear effusion, infections, and possible hearing loss. 
         Underlying defect in the musculature of cleft palate.  Underlying defect in the musculature of cleft palate.  Using cone-beam computed tomography (CT) scanning, a study by Celikoglu et al found at least one maxillary dental anomaly in 50 patients with nonsyndromic cleft lip and palate, with tooth agenesis being the most frequent. The study, of 22 and 28 patients with bilateral and unilateral cleft lip and palate, respectively, found tooth agenesis in 86.4% of the bilateral patients and 92.5% of the unilateral patients. In the unilateral group, the incidence of tooth agenesis and canine impaction were greater on the cleft side of the mouth than on the normal side. [ A study by Datana et al indicated that the prevalence of upper cervical vertebrae anomalies is more than three times greater in persons with cleft lip/palate than in those without the condition. The prevalence was 20.3% in the cleft group overall, compared with 6.4% in the control group. In patients with unilateral cleft lip and palate, the prevalence was 22.2%, while in those with bilateral cleft lip and palate, the prevalence was 19.1%, and in patients with cleft palate only, the prevalence of upper cervical vertebrae anomalies was 16.6%. The study involved 128 patients with cleft lip/palate and 125 controls. [ 
     Management of Cleft Lip and Palate 
       Neonatal management, unilateral and bilateral cleft lip repair, presurgical orthodontics, and cleft palate repair are discussed in this section.  
       Neonatal management A minority of patients, particularly those with the Robin sequence (see Robin sequence under Selected Mouth and Pharynx Deformities), present with respiratory distress. Securing the airway is the priority in these patients. However, feeding difficulty is the primary problem for most patients with cleft lip and palate (CLP). Although these patients have normal sucking and swallowing reflexes, they have difficulty generating enough negative pressure to nurse adequately. As a result, the baby's nutrition must be delivered through bottle feeding via nipples with large openings to facilitate the delivery of breast milk or formula.  A multidisciplinary approach is required to assist patients and their families with the comprehensive care of these children. Responsibility for their care is shared by a team of pediatricians, plastic surgeons, otolaryngologists, pedodontists, orthodontists, nurses, speech therapists, audiologists, and social workers.  
       Unilateral cleft lip repair Repair of the unilateral cleft lip (CL) is usually performed during the first year of life. Although some surgeons advocate immediate repair, most follow the “rules of 10”: hemoglobin more than 10 g, age older than 10 weeks, and weight more than 10 lb. Patients who satisfy the criteria can better tolerate  general anesthesia Discussion of the merits of individual surgical procedures for correction of the cleft lip (CL) is beyond the scope of this review. All contemporary procedures use local tissue flaps for reconstruction and closure of the congenital anomaly. Interested readers are urged to refer to surgical atlases or the following:  
         
           
             Cleft Lip 
           
             Unilateral Cleft Lip Repair 
       Presurgical orthodontics Presurgical orthodontics facilitate repositioning of the palatal segments into normal alignment with the use of an appliance. [ 
       Bilateral cleft lip repair The bilateral cleft lip deformity is unique, because its management and postoperative results are affected by the status of the premaxillary segment and the degree of symmetry and completeness of the deformity. The goals of surgical correction of a bilateral cleft lip include correction of the cleft lip (CL) and nasal deformity in addition to establishment of a normal relationship between the premaxilla and the alveolar arches. Presurgical orthodontics are used to realign the maxillary arch and premaxilla and to minimize the tension placed on the lip closure. [ El-Kassaby et al (2013) published a retrospective comparative study of nonsyndromic patients with complete bilateral cleft lip and palate. [ For a discussion of surgical procedures used to repair bilateral cleft lip, please refer to plastic surgery texts or the following:  
         
           
             Cleft Lip 
           
             Bilateral Cleft Lip Repair 
       Cleft palate repair The goals of cleft palate (CP) repair include closure of the palatal defect and attainment of normal speech, hearing, dental occlusion, and facial and palatal growth. The timing of surgical correction remains controversial. Factors considered before repair must take into account the known and postulated affects on facial growth and speech development. [ The trauma sustained during surgical intervention is thought to play a role in the underdevelopment of the midface. The persistence of a cleft deformity, per se, is not believed to affect normal craniofacial growth. Patients with cleft deformities that are left surgically uncorrected have been observed to have normal maxillary growth.  The development of speech is somewhat independent of craniofacial growth. That vocalization begins with birth is well known. In addition, an intact speech mechanism is required to ensure that the correct neural programming needed for integration of the musculature involved in speech occurs. This process is thought to transpire within the first year of life. Once established, compensatory speech patterns are difficult to change.  Common opinion maintains that although early palatal repair is associated with superior speech and hearing, it has negative effects on facial growth. Operative intervention at a younger age is also technically more challenging because of the small size of the structures and the limitations of the instruments.  Most centers in North America perform palatal closure at age 12-18 months. Patients in this age group have larger anatomy, which facilitates surgical intervention. In addition, common belief asserts that normal speech development is not impeded at this age.  Surgical repair of the cleft palate falls into 2 categories. The first is a single-stage repair involving closure with mucoperiosteal flaps. The second involves a multistage approach in which the soft palate is closed initially, followed by a delayed closure of the hard palate.  In a 2008 retrospective study by Khosla et al concluded that the Furlow Z-plasty yielded excellent speech results for primary cleft palate repair with minimal and acceptable rates of fistula formation, velopharyngeal insufficiency, and the need for additional corrective surgery.  Distraction osteogenesis [ For more information regarding cleft palate repair, see  Cleft Palate Repair 
     Velopharyngeal Insufficiency 
       A competent velopharyngeal mechanism is required for normal speech. The velopharyngeal sphincter functions in concert with the mouth and larynx for speech production. The palate separates the nasal cavity from the vocal tract and forms a part of the velopharyngeal sphincter. Closure of the sphincter is accomplished by the movement of the soft palate (tension and elevation) as well as lateral and posterior movement of the posterior pharyngeal wall.  Velopharyngeal insufficiency (VPI) results from an inability to completely close the velopharyngeal sphincter. Velopharyngeal insufficiency is characterized by hypernasality; nasal emission; and adaptive changes in articulations, such as pharyngeal fricatives, sound substitution, and glottal stops.  The goal of palatal repair is to restore accurate phonation and functional anatomy. Most techniques of palatal repair result in a 20-30% incidence of velopharyngeal insufficiency.  
       Diagnosis If a child is found to have velopharyngeal insufficiency based on speech derangement, additional quantitative and dynamic measurements are required. Pressure and airflow measurements, both oral and nasal, are generally used only as screening tools, because they provide no details about sphincter function.  In order to compare nasendoscopy (NE) with multiview fluoroscopy (MVF) in the assessment of velopharyngeal gap size and to determine the relationship between these assessments and velopharyngeal insufficiency severity, Lam et al demonstrated that NE and MVF assessments provide complementary information and are correlated. [ Radiologic methods of assessment include soft-tissue radiography and videofluoroscopy. Radiography provides a 2-dimensional (2-D) image of the relationship between the soft palate and the posterior pharyngeal wall, but it is not a dynamic technique. Conversely, videofluoroscopy provides dynamic information regarding the sphincter mechanism. Flexible and rigid endoscopy can also be used to assess velopharyngeal insufficiency. The advantage of endoscopy is that it allows direct observation of sphincter function. VPI can be surgically corrected with the use of pharyngeal flaps, [ Yang et al (2013) published a retrospective review on 503 patients. [ P P Leclerc et al (2013) published on anatomical measurements of the cleft palate that predict the occurrence of VPI after palatal cleft repair. [ 
     Selected Mouth and Pharynx Deformities 
       The Robin sequence, macroglossia, ankyloglossia, epignathus, lingual thyroid, and a few other conditions are briefly discussed in this section.  
       Robin sequence  The Robin sequence includes cleft palate (CP), a small mouth, and retrognathia. Retrognathism results in a functional abnormality of the tongue musculature that manifests with airway obstruction during sleep, as the tongue falls posteriorly. In addition to the respiratory difficulties, feeding difficulties can result in a failure to thrive.  The severity of airway compromise dictates management. In mild cases, conservative treatment consists of placing the patient in a prone position and intensive monitoring. Surgery is indicated if no improvement occurs after 7 days. Surgery involves either tracheostomy or repositioning of the tongue.  For more information, see  Pierre Robin Syndrome 
       Macroglossia Congenital macroglossia may be secondary to tumors (eg, dermoids), muscular hypertrophy or hyperplasia (Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome), or hemihypertrophy. Vascular malformation is a common cause of macroglossia. [ Lymphangiomas are the most common vascular malformations of the tongue. Surgical biopsy or relatively minor trauma to the patient with lymphangioma can result in massive swelling, with difficulty in closing the mouth or, at times, airway compromise. Increased swelling can occur with superimposed lymphangitis. Early in life, conservative treatment is recommended; this includes the avoidance of trauma and the prompt use of antibiotics at the first sign of infection. Surgery is usually delayed until the child is older (4-5 y) to decrease the likelihood of postoperative airway problems.  Macroglossia is a feature of Down syndrome. The etiology is believed to be a reactive hypertrophy due to muscular hypotonia. The combination of macroglossia and a small oral cavity in these patients results in glossoptosis. Partial glossectomy is usually successful in returning the tongue to the oral cavity and in removing this visible stigma of mental retardation.  Macroglossia can also be associated with a few syndromes, such as Treacher Collins (mandibulofacial dysostosis or Franceschetti-Zwahlen-Klein) syndrome.  
       Ankyloglossia Ankyloglossia is due to the presence of a frenulum tethering the tip of the tongue to the floor of the mouth. The commonly used term to describe ankyloglossia is  tongue-tied. Surgical intervention is indicated for articulation problems and for feeding difficulties (poor suckling), dental problems (spreading of the lower incisor teeth), or requests by the patient's parents. Release may involve simple division of the involved band of tissue or a Z-plasty lengthening procedure. Injury to the Wharton duct should be avoided.  
       Epignathus Epignathi are rare teratomas that histologically contain tissue of all 3 germ-cell lines. [ 
         Newborn with epignathus. The patient was intubated at birth.  Newborn with epignathus. The patient was intubated at birth.  Prenatal ultrasonography usually demonstrates the mass protruding from the fetal face. [ Management involves emergently securing an airway by intubation or formal tracheostomy. A magnetic resonance image (MRI) (or computed tomography [CT] scan) is required before surgical intervention to rule out an encephalocele or intracranial extension of the lesion. Once the extent of the mass is adequately determined, the tumor can be excised through the oral cavity.  
       Lingual thyroid A lingual thyroid is due to the undescended thyroid at the tongue base. Common symptoms include dysphagia; dysphonia; and, occasionally, dyspnea. Thyroid ultrasonography has replaced radioisotope thyroid scanning in the evaluation of the amount of active thyroid tissue present.  Management depends on functional and metabolic factors. If the patient is euthyroid, observation with careful follow-up is advised. Suppressive thyroid hormone therapy should be initiated if a hypothyroid status develops. If the lingual swelling increases, surgical excision with replacement therapy is indicated.  
       Other conditions Lip pits represent vestigial remnants of the lateral sulci of the mandible at the 7.5- to 12.5-mm stage of the embryo. In van der Woude syndrome (an autosomal dominant syndrome with 90% penetrance), lip pits are paramedian and usually bilateral. They vary in depth from a few millimeters to 3 centimeters or more. A communication may exist with the minor salivary glands of the lower lip. Lip pits may also occur in popliteal pterygium syndrome and in aganglionic megacolon with cleft lip and palate (CLP).  Commissural lip pits occur more frequently than other lip pits and are not related to the syndromes just described. Their prevalence is estimated to be 1 case per 300 white persons and 1 case per 48 black persons.  Micrognathia could be associated with numerous syndromes and conditions, such as an adducted thumb, atelosteogenesis (types I and III); cerebrocostomandibular findings; the Robin sequence; and Aase-Smith, Chitayat-Azouz, chromosome 3 dup 3p, chromosome 4 partial del 4p, chromosome 7 term del 7q, Say, and Shprintzen (velocardiofacial) syndromes. [ For a discussion of facial clefts, see  Congenital Malformations of the Nose Congenital Malformations of the Neck 
     start media 
       
         Illustration depicts fusion of the lateral nasal, medial nasal, and maxillary prominences to... Illustration depicts fusion of the lateral nasal, medial nasal, and maxillary prominences to form the primary palate.  
       
         Formation of the secondary palate.  Formation of the secondary palate.  
       
         Veau classification of cleft lip and palate. A: Group I. Defects of the soft palate only. B:... Veau classification of cleft lip and palate. A: Group I. Defects of the soft palate only. B: Group II. Defects involving the hard palate and soft palate. C: Group III. Defects involving the soft palate to the alveolus, usually involving the lip. D: Group IV. Complete bilateral clefts.  
       
         Kernahan and Stark symbolic classification of cleft lip and palate. R = right; L = left.  Kernahan and Stark symbolic classification of cleft lip and palate. R = right; L = left.  
       
         Muscular defects in unilateral deformity.  Muscular defects in unilateral deformity.  
       
         Normal anatomy of the palate.  Normal anatomy of the palate.  
       
         Muscles of the soft palate.  Muscles of the soft palate.  
       
         Variations of cleft palate.  Variations of cleft palate.  
       
         Underlying defect in the musculature of cleft palate.  Underlying defect in the musculature of cleft palate.  
       
         Newborn with epignathus. The patient was intubated at birth.  Newborn with epignathus. The patient was intubated at birth.  
     
       Author 
         Ted L Tewfik, MD Professor of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Professor of Pediatric Surgery, McGill University Faculty of Medicine; Senior Staff, Montreal Children's Hospital, Montreal General Hospital, and Royal Victoria Hospital Ted L Tewfik, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American Society of Pediatric Otolaryngology Canadian Society of Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Coauthor(s) 
         Naznin Karsan, MD, MSc Staff Physician, Department of Otolaryngology, McGill University, Canada Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
         Alyssa Kanaan, MD Fellow in Rhinology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Pharmacy Editor 
         Francisco Talavera, PharmD, PhD Adjunct Assistant Professor, University of Nebraska Medical Center College of Pharmacy; Editor-in-Chief, Medscape Drug Reference Disclosure: Received salary from Medscape for employment. for: Medscape. 
       Chief Editor 
         Arlen D Meyers, MD, MBA Professor of Otolaryngology, Dentistry, and Engineering, University of Colorado School of Medicine Arlen D Meyers, MD, MBA is a member of the following medical societies:  American Academy of Facial Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery American Academy of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery American Head and Neck Society Disclosure: Serve(d) as a director, officer, partner, employee, advisor, consultant or trustee for: Medvoy;Testappropriate;Cerescan;Empirican;RxRevu<br/>Received none from Allergy Solutions, Inc for board membership; Received honoraria from RxRevu for chief medical editor; Received salary from Medvoy for founder and president; Received consulting fee from Corvectra for senior medical advisor; Received ownership interest from Cerescan for consulting; Received consulting fee from Essiahealth for advisor; Received consulting fee from Carespan for advisor; Received consulting fee from Covidien for consulting. 
       Additional Contributors 
         Michael J Biavati, MD, FACS, FAAP Clinical Assistant Professor of Otolaryngology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, Southwestern Medical School; Private Practice, ENT Care for Kids, Dallas, TX Michael J Biavati, MD, FACS, FAAP is a member of the following medical societies:  American Academy of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery American Society of Pediatric Otolaryngology Society for Ear, Nose and Throat Advances in Children American Academy of Pediatrics American Cleft Palate-Craniofacial Association American College of Surgeons The Triological Society Texas Medical Association Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
     
       Dionisopoulos T, Williams HB.  Congenital anomalies of the Ear, Nose and Throat 
       Kernahan DA. The striped Y--a symbolic classification for cleft lip and palate.  Plast Reconstr Surg [Medline] 
       Koul R. Describing cleft lip and palate using a new expression system.  Cleft Palate Craniofac J [Medline] 
       Fara M. The musculature of cleft lip and palate. McCarthy JG, ed.  Plastic Surgery 
       Celikoglu M, Buyuk SK, Sekerci AE, et al. Maxillary dental anomalies in patients with cleft lip and palate: a cone beam computed tomography study.  J Clin Pediatr Dent [Medline] 
       Datana S, Bhalla A, Kumar P, et al. Comparative evaluation of prevalence of upper cervical vertebrae anomalies in cleft lip/palate patients: a retrospective study.  Int J Clin Pediatr Dent [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Rutrick R, Black PW, Jurkiewicz MJ. Bilateral cleft lip and palate: presurgical treatment.  Ann Plast Surg [Medline] 
       El-Kassaby MA, Abdelrahman NI, Abbass IT. Premaxillary characteristics in complete bilateral cleft lip and palate: A predictor for treatment outcome.  Ann Maxillofac Surg [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Brøndsted K, Liisberg WB, Orsted A, Prytz S, Fogh-Andersen P. Surgical and speech results following palatopharyngoplasty operations in Denmark 1959-1977.  Cleft Palate J [Medline] 
       Khosla RK, Mabry K, Castiglione CL. Clinical outcomes of the Furlow Z-plasty for primary cleft palate repair.  Cleft Palate Craniofac J [Medline] 
       Bevilacqua RG, Ritoli EL, Kang C, Mabry K, Castiglione CL. Midmaxillary internal distraction osteogenesis: ideal surgery for the mature cleft patient.  Plast Reconstr Surg [Medline] 
       Lam DJ,  Starr JR,  Perkins JA,  Lewis CW,  Eblen LE,  Dunlap J, et al. A comparison of nasendoscopy and multiview videofluoroscopy in assessing velopharyngeal insufficiency.  Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg [Medline] 
       Wójcicki P, Swidzinski P, Wójcicka G. [Velopharyngeal incompentance treated by the pharyngeal flap and the Orticochea pharyngoplasty--a comparison of speech results].  Otolaryngol Pol [Medline] 
       Yang Y,  Li Y,  Wu Y,  Gu Y,  Yin H,  Long H, et al. Velopharyngeal function of patients with cleft palate after primary palatoplasty: relevance of sex, age, and cleft type.  J Craniofac Surg [Medline] 
       Leclerc JE, Godbout A, Gauthier IA, Lacour S, Abel K, McConnell EM. We can predict post palatoplasty velopharyngeal insufficiency in cleft palate patients.  Laryngoscope [Medline] 
       Vogel JE, Mulliken JB, Kaban LB. Macroglossia: a review of the condition and a new classification.  Plast Reconstr Surg [Medline] 
       Pavlin JE, O'Gorman A, Williams HB, Crépeau RJ, Shapiro RS. Epignathus: a report of two cases.  Ann Plast Surg [Medline] 
       Tonni G, Centini G, Inaudi P, Rosignoli L, Ginnaneschi C, De Felice C. Prenatal diagnosis of severe epignathous in a twin: Case report and review of the literature.  Cleft Palate Craniofac J [Medline] 
       Nora JJ, Fraser FC, Bear J, et al.  Medical Genetics: Principle and Practice

Article 27:

   
     Sleep-Disordered Breathing and CPAP 
       Sleep-Disordered Breathing and CPAP: Overview of Sleep-Disordered Breathing, Pathophysiology of SDB, Etiology of SDB 
       Sleep-Disordered Breathing and CPAP: Overview of Sleep-Disordered Breathing, Pathophysiology of SDB, Etiology of SDB 
       Overview Overview of Sleep-Disordered Breathing Pathophysiology of SDB Etiology of SDB Epidemiology of SDB Prognosis for SDB Clinical Presentation of SDB Differential Diagnosis of SDB Laboratory Studies Imaging Studies Epworth Sleepiness Scale Polysomnography Screening Questionnaires Home Sleep Testing and Ambulatory Monitors Acoustic Snoring Analysis Histologic Findings Sleep Endoscopy Initial Treatment of SBD Treatment with Nasal CPAP Oxygen Pharmacologic Treatments Surgical Management of SDB Further Outpatient Care 
       Sleep-Disordered Breathing and CPAP Overview 870192-overview Dec 17, 2013 2015-08-04-18:53 1 Clinical Procedures 2002 Procedures Procedure 
       1 2 content 870192 503 3032210 13 ssg 
     Jun 04, 2015 
       procedure Procedures 
       clinical_procedures Clinical Procedures 
       clinical_procedures_respiratory Lung and Respiratory sleep-disordered breathing, SDB, continuous positive airway pressure, CPAP, n-CPAP, apnea, sleep apnea, snoring, obstructive sleep apnea, OSA, sleep apnea snoring, obstructive sleep apnea syndrome, OSAS, upper airway obstruction occurring during sleep Upper airway obstruction occurring during sleep—that is, sleep-disordered breathing (SDB)—was first demonstrated in the 1960s. SDB represents a group of physiopathologic conditions that are characterized by an abnormal respiratory pattern during sleep that can be isolated or can coexist with other respiratory, nervous, cardiovascular, or endo... 0 Sleep-Disordered Breathing and CPAP 
     Overview of Sleep-Disordered Breathing 
       Upper airway obstruction occurring during sleep—that is, sleep-disordered breathing (SDB)—was first demonstrated in the 1960s. SDB represents a group of physiopathologic conditions that are characterized by an abnormal respiratory pattern during sleep that can be isolated or can coexist with other respiratory, nervous, cardiovascular, or endocrine diseases. SDB is now known to be widely prevalent in the general population, and it is responsible for or contributes to numerous problems, ranging from fragmented sleep patterns to hypertension to traffic accidents. [ SDB includes obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), which consists of breathing cessations of at least 10 seconds occurring in the presence of inspiratory efforts during sleep. Central sleep apnea consists of similar apneas, but these instead take place in the absence of inspiratory efforts. [ The obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS) is a potentially disabling condition characterized by excessive daytime sleepiness, [ Risk factors for sleep apnea include obesity, increased neck circumference, craniofacial abnormalities, hypothyroidism, and acromegaly. Daytime consequences include not only excessive sleepiness but also impaired cognitive performance and disturbed moods with a reduced quality of life. Excessive daytime sleepiness is reported to be associated with a higher risk of motor vehicle accidents and work place injuries or poor work performance  . In general, everyone with SDB snores, but not everyone who snores has SDB. Snoring in the absence of SDB is termed primary or simple snoring. However, some evidence indicates that snoring is one end of a clinical continuum with an opposite extreme of severe OSA. Some health problems may be associated even with primary snoring.  Upper airway resistance syndrome (UARS) is characterized by snoring with increased resistance in the upper airway, resulting in arousals during sleep. This can disturb sleep architecture to the point of causing daytime somnolence. No distinct diagnostic criteria exist for this entity. Patients with UARS can be treated with nasal continuous positive airway pressure (n-CPAP). [ Treatment involves elimination of contributing factors and provision of n-CPAP. n-CPAP is effective in improving sleep quality and reducing daytime sleepiness. Long-term treatment with n-CPAP reduces both mortality and the acute blood pressure elevation that occurs with SDB. [ Go to  Obstructive Sleep Apnea Pediatric Sleep Apnea Snoring and Obstructive Sleep Apnea, Surgery Obstructive Sleep Apnea, Home Sleep Monitoring Snoring and Obstructive Sleep Apnea, Upper Airway Evaluation Snoring and Obstructive Sleep Apnea, Oral Appliances Snoring and Obstructive Sleep Apnea, Physiologic Approach For patient education information, see the  Sleep Disorders Center Snoring Narcolepsy 
     Pathophysiology of SDB 
       Any factors that decrease upper airway size or patency during sleep can lead to intermittent obstruction during inspiration, despite inspiratory effort. If the obstruction is sufficiently prolonged, blood-oxygen levels drop. Then, the patient arouses or awakens. The arousals disrupt normal sleep architecture. These, together with the oxygenation drops, are responsible for the more severe accompaniments of sleep-disordered breathing (SDB), including hypertension, arrhythmias, and death. [ Factors affecting upper airway size or patency include numerous anatomic variants and abnormalities (eg, nasal obstruction, retrognathia,  macroglossia Obesity contributes to SDB by changing pharyngeal size and shape. Fat storage in the neck may be particularly associated with risk for SDB, although a subset of patients with SDB are of normal body weight. Many of these patients have a family history of snoring or SDB.  Alcohol intake near bedtime can cause or worsen SDB by reducing the activity of the upper airway dilating muscles. Alcohol increases both the number and duration of apneic or hypopneic events.  Racial studies and chromosomal mapping, familial studies, and twin studies have provided evidence for a possible link between the obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS) and genetic factors. Genetic factors associated with craniofacial structure, body fat distribution, and neural control of the upper airway muscles likely interact to produce the OSAS phenotype. [ Although the role of specific genes that influence the development of OSAS has not yet been identified, current researchers, especially in the animal model, suggest that several genetic systems may be important.  Human leukocyte antigen (HLA)–DQB1*0602 allele, a well-known genetic risk factor for narcolepsy, has been described as a potential genetic factor influencing sleep physiology in individuals diagnosed with OSAS. [ Polymorphisms in the serotonin (5-HT) receptor gene can alter its transcription, affecting the number of receptors in the serotoninergic system, contributing to OSAS. [ 
     Etiology of SDB 
       Important clinical risk factors for SDB are as follows:  
         
           Nasal obstruction 
           Craniofacial abnormalities 
           Mandibular retrognathia 
           Micrognathia 
           Narrowed, tapered, and short maxillary arch 
           Overbite 
           Long soft palate 
           Modified Mallampati grade III or IV 
           Macroglossia 
           Tonsillar hypertrophy 
           Neck circumference more than 17 inches for men and more than 16 inches for women 
           Obesity Other problems that can contribute to or exacerbate SDB are sedative or alcohol use and poor sleep hygiene. A very small percentage of patients with SDB have central rather than obstructive sleep apnea. Central sleep apnea can be caused by various neurologic disorders or can be idiopathic.  
     Epidemiology of SDB 
       All the epidemiological studies indicate that sleep apnea is more common in men than in women (the male-to-female ratio is 2-3: 1). Sleep apnea occurs in 4% of men and 2% of women aged 30-60 years. A retrospective study on 830 patients with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS) reports a male-to-female ratio (M:F) that increases with the gravity of the disease: 2.2:1 in mild OSAS and 7.9:1 in severe OSAS. [ The discrepancy between the lower prevalence of obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), the greater frequency of obesity, and the smaller airway size in women compared with men suggests that a gender difference underlies this condition.  Men tend to have a larger but more collapsible airway during mandibular movement than women and this, in part, may play a role in the positional dependency and severity of OSA in men.  Another possible reason for the lower prevalence of OSAS may be reluctance on the part of many women to report symptoms mostly considered inappropriate, like snoring; this reluctance may cause a clinical underestimation of the problem in females.  The gender-related protective effect decreases in females who are postmenopausal and not on hormone replacement therapy. [ The association between age and obstructive sleep apnea is complex. Several studies have shown a higher prevalence of OSA in elderly persons than in middle-aged persons, although daytime symptoms may be less common with advancing age.  The Sleep Heart Health Study demonstrated that the influence of male sex and body mass index (BMI) on obstructive sleep apnea tends to wane with age. For unclear reasons, the overall prevalence of obstructive sleep apnea plateaus after age 65 years. [ The prevalence of OSAS among African-American persons seems to be at least equal to and possibly greater than that among white persons. The prevalence among men in urban India and men and women in Korea is similar to that observed in Western countries. Some researchers have noticed an increased incidence of OSA in persons of Asian origin.  
     Prognosis for SDB 
       Excessive daytime sleepiness resulting from SDB can impact focus and concentration, causing decreased work effectiveness. Even mild-to-moderate SDB increases reaction time, causing performance decreases similar to alcohol intoxication. This can lead to motor vehicle accidents and other serious accidents in situations where alertness is required for safety (eg, heavy machinery operators).  Moderate-to-severe obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is associated with earlier death. The cardiovascular sequelae of untreated OSA include hypertension, cor pulmonale, arrhythmias, and increased risk of myocardial infarction or stroke. [ [ [ OSA is associated with difficult-to-control hypertension. [ [ Recent studies have examined the relationship between OSA and glucose tolerance, and many have shown a direct and independent relationship between OSA and diabetes. The Wisconsin Sleep Study Cohort showed a greater prevalence of diabetes in subjects with increasing levels of OSA. [ [ The probable mechanisms connecting OSA with glucose tolerance and type 2 diabetes mellitus includes the increased sympathetic activity, the sympathovagal dysfunction, alterations in neuroendocrine function (especially in growth hormone [GH] and cortisol levels), high inflammatory state with an increase in the release of proinflammatory cytokines. [ 
     Clinical Presentation of SDB 
       Patient history The first clue in the history of patients with SDB is loud snoring. This is accompanied by breathing cessation; gasping, choking, and snorting; frequent arousals from sleep; and respiratory effort with no air. Nocturnal arrhythmias and acute blood pressure increases may occur. Morning headaches that dissipate as the day goes on, excessive daytime sleepiness, and poor concentration affect daytime performance. The disorder has been linked to an increased risk of angina, myocardial ischemia, stroke and motor vehicle crashes.  Older men may report getting up numerous times during the night to urinate and are convinced that they awaken because of the urge to urinate. The truth is often the reverse, that they awaken as a result of SDB and only then notice the urge to urinate. These patients are often surprised at their decreased need for nocturnal urination after successful SDB treatment.  Laryngopharyngeal reflux can cause a patient to suddenly awaken from sleep, gasping for breath. A feeling of terror is often present.  Inadequate sleep time can cause excessive daytime sleepiness. This may be involuntary, as in insomnia, or voluntary. Insomnia is characterized by the inability to fall asleep or awakening during the night and being unable to fall back to sleep. Inadequate sleep time occurs for other voluntary reasons (eg, working more than one job, family responsibilities).  Patients with hypothyroidism can also present with fatigue, daytime somnolence, and  obesity [ Narcolepsy can also cause excessive daytime sleepiness. 
       Physical examination Most patients with SDB are overweight or obese. A patient with a short, thick neck may be predisposed to SDB. Scalloped indentations along the lateral tongue (from teeth) are a marker for relative tongue/mandibular arch size mismatch, which may predispose individuals to SDB.  Children with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS) are likely to present with normal body weight, tonsillar hypertrophy, and inattentiveness during school classes. [ 
       Complications If not adequately diagnosed and treated, OSAS is associated with severe complications such as hypertension, strokes, coronary disease, and neurobehavioral complaints and is probably a predictor of premature death. At least 50% of patients with heart failure have sleep respiratory apneas, and patients with moderate-to-severe OSAS have a 3-fold increased risk of developing hypertension. [ 
     Differential Diagnosis of SDB 
       The differential diagnosis of SDB includes the following:  
         
           Simple snoring 
           Central sleep apnea 
           Other disorders that cause daytime sleepiness (eg, insufficient sleep, a circadian-rhythm abnormality, narcolepsy, periodic limb movement disorder).  
     Laboratory Studies 
       The relation between snoring, obstructive sleep apnea, and hypothyroidism has been confirmed by many authors. Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) levels should be determined in patients who are newly diagnosed with SDB because SDB is relatively common among patients with hypothyroidism. Significant increases in homocysteine levels have been observed in obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS) patients with cardiovascular disease.  
     Imaging Studies 
       Radiologic and diagnostic studies have been used to identify the obstruction site, direct surgical intervention and predict outcomes of sleep apnea surgery. These studies include lateral cephalometric radiographs, computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), asleep fluoroscopy, asleep and awake endoscopy with Mueller maneuver, upper airway manometry, and acoustic reflection techniques. [ Most of those techniques have limitations (dynamic and tridimensional evaluation) in the mechanism of occlusion investigation. Ultrafast MRI provides a reliable and noninvasive method for static and dynamic evaluation of the soft tissue structures surrounding the upper airway during the respiratory cycle in wakefulness and sleep.  
     Epworth Sleepiness Scale 
       The Epworth Sleepiness Scale is a questionnaire filled out by the patient that is used to provide a standardized semiquantitative subjective assessment of daytime sleepiness.  In this questionnaire, patients are instructed to rate the chance of dozing off in a number of different situations. They are to choose the most appropriate ranking for each of these situations, working out how they would probably respond if it is something they have not actually done recently. Scoring for the Epworth Sleepiness Scale is shown in the table below.  
         Table 1. Epworth Sleepiness Scale Questionnaire 
           
             
               
                 Scoring 0 - Would never doze off 1 - Slight chance of dozing off 2 - Moderate chance of dozing off 3 - High chance of dozing off 
             
               
                 Score situation _____ Sitting and reading _____ Watching TV _____ Sitting inactive in a public place (eg, theater, meeting) _____ As a passenger in a car for an hour without break _____ Lying down to rest in the afternoon when circumstances permit _____ Sitting and talking to someone _____ Sitting quietly after a lunch without alcohol _____ In a car, while stopped for a few minutes in the traffic _____  Total* 
             
               *A total score of 0-5 is supernormal; 5-10 is normal; 10-15 is sleepy; 15-20 is very sleepy; and > 20 is dangerously sleepy (arrange transportation for patient)  
     Polysomnography 
       Polysomnography (PSG) is the criterion standard diagnostic test for obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS). A respiratory event suggestive of OSAS is defined as a decrease in nasal and oral airflow, alone or with thoracoabdominal movements, more than 90% (apnea) or more than 50% and less than 90% (hypopnea) that lasted for at least 10 seconds. A decrease in arterial oxygen saturation of 4% or more is considered significant oxygen desaturation. [ Information from PSG is reported in the form of the respiratory disturbance index (RDI) (also referred to as the apnea-hypopnea index [AHI]). The RDI is the number of apneas or hypopneas 10 seconds or longer occurring per hour of sleep. A normal RDI is less than 5. A RDI less than or equal to 5 is considered suggestive of simple snoring with no OSAS. Greater than 5 and less than or equal to 15 is suggestive of mild OSAS. More than 15 and less than or equal to 30 is suggestive of moderate OSAS. Finally, more than 30 is suggestive of severe OSAS.  The loudness and persistence of snoring (constant versus intermittent) are usually reported. Body position is also recorded so one can determine what position (usually supine) and in what sleep phase (usually rapid eye movement [REM] sleep, when muscle tone is most relaxed) the patient is in when respiratory events occur.  In-laboratory PSG is the criterion standard for diagnosing OSAS. However, PSG has several limitations, including the necessity of performing the test in a sleep laboratory, high costs, the considerable technical expertise required, and the long analyzing time needed by the operator. In addition, the examination often needs to be repeated because of the interference of monitoring electrodes with the physiological sleep of the patient (“first night effect”). Therefore, timely access to PSG is often a problem.  
     Screening Questionnaires 
       Because PSG is expensive and not widely available, an extensive interest in alternative diagnostic approaches, such as clinical prediction rules and portable monitors, has been expressed. A limited number of questionnaires are available to detect some sleep disorders, but those instruments do not achieve the reliability of PSG, which remains the recommended method of assessing patients with suspected sleep disorders. The role of those questionnaires is mainly of a screening tool for identifying patients at risk for OSAS. [ Many questionnaires have been developed for screening OSAS. The Rome Questionnaire (RQ) is a 7-item questionnaire useful in identifying adult patients at risk of obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. The RQ, together with BMI, is reported to be a useful tool to select patients at higher risk of moderate-severe OSAS, who need a prompt PSG evaluation. [ 
     Home Sleep Testing and Ambulatory Monitors 
       Home sleep testing pursues the goal of simplify the diagnosis of sleep apnea while retaining the essential recording features of PSG. Recent studies have suggested that home sleep studies have benefits in terms of time and cost, but for diagnostic reliability, an in-laboratory sleep study may be required in more than half of the cases.  Various types of ambulatory (to be used at home) monitors can measure parameters such as airflow, chest, and abdomen movements (as indicators of respiratory effort); oxygen desaturations; snoring; pulse; and body position. [ Although the data from such studies are not as detailed or accurate as an overnight PSG, these studies can often be used to differentiate primary snoring from snoring with apneas and can usually provide an indication of the frequency with which apneas are occurring. In contrast, techniques that measure only one parameter (eg, home oximetry alone) seem to be less accurate than those that track several measurements.  EdenTrace portable monitor measures nasal and oral air flow using thermistors, chest wall impedance, oxygen saturation with finger pulse oximetry, heart rate, and movement detected by electrical comparison of the signals from electrocardiography and pulse oximetry.  The MESAM IV system evaluates SDB based on an analysis of snoring, heart rate, and saturation change. Even if in many studies there is a good agreement between the RDI measured in the laboratory and with the home sleep testing, there is a risk that ambulatory diagnostic procedures may alter the relationship of patients to their disease and/or the medical staff so that subsequent compliance with treatment may be decreased.  The Nightwatch system has the ability to calculate the RDI. It records eye movement (1 channel, piezo electrode), leg movement (1 channel, piezo electrode), (finger pulse oximeter), nasal oral airflow (thermistor), chest and abdominal movements (piezo electrodes), body position and movement (mercury gauge placed on the chest), and heart rate.  The Nightwatch system also has the ability to send 2-minute portions of the complete recording to the laboratory for analysis so that signal quality can be assessed and transducer function corrected if needed. However, further studies are necessary before this technology can be put into widespread use. In order to develop a simpler, cheaper, and more accessible method for the diagnosis of OSAS, the peripheral arterial tonometer (PAT) has been proposed as a new method in ambulatory diagnosis of OSAS. The portable monitoring device WatchPAT 200 detects obstructive events by identifying the changes in sympathetic activity associated with the termination of the events. The wrist-worn device WatchPAT 200, compared with standard polysomnography (PSG), has been reported to be able to detect OSAS based on apnea-hypopnea index (AHI) with comparable accuracy. [ 
     Acoustic Snoring Analysis 
       Acoustic analysis of snoring sounds may help differentiate between primary snoring and obstructive sleep apnea (OSA). Other researchers have investigated the combination of clinical variables such as neck and chest circumference, BMI, and resting room air oxygen saturation; however, none of these has been shown to differentiate consistently between primary snorers and patients with significant apneas and desaturations during sleep.  
     Histologic Findings 
       The histology of the soft palate and uvula in snorers and patients with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS) has been investigated by many authors. [ Other authors have observed similar contents of glands, muscle, fat, blood vessels, and the epithelium in the uvula and the soft palate of either OSAS or control subjects.  
     Sleep Endoscopy 
       Drug-induced sleep endoscopy (DISE) is a safe and reliable technique to determine the pattern of upper airway obstruction and the contribution of specific structures to airway obstruction. [ Identifying the site and the dynamic pattern of obstruction is mandatory in therapeutical decision-making, and, in particular, if a surgical therapy option is taken into consideration. [ The nose, oropharynx, hypopharynx, and larynx (NOHL) classification, which could be applied during awake and sleep endoscopy, allows a simple, quick, and effective evaluation of grade and patterns of upper airway collapse. [ 
     Initial Treatment of SBD 
       Eliminating contributing factors The first task in treating patients with SDB is to eliminate all possible contributing factors. This includes weight loss for patients who are obese and elimination of alcohol or sedative use, especially near bedtime. Benzodiazepines, narcotics, and barbiturates can worsen SDB, or sometimes they initiate it where it had not previously been present.  A 10% weight loss was associated with a 26% decrease in the AHI (RDI) in a population-based study. Weight loss should be recommended for all obese patients with sleep apnea; however, weight loss takes time, and only a minority of patients successfully maintains it. [ 
       Body positioning during sleep Body positioning during sleep can improve SDB in some patients. Because lying supine can allow gravity to assist in pulling lax tongue muscles back toward the posterior pharyngeal wall, patients should sleep on their sides, on their stomachs, or propped up 60°. These positions can improve SDB in patients whose symptoms occur primarily while supine.  Avoidance of supine sleeping can easily be accomplished with a sock, tennis ball, and safety pins. The tennis ball in a sock is pinned to the back of the pajamas, positioning the tennis ball between the scapulae. When the patient rolls into the supine position during sleep, this lump is uncomfortable enough that the position is immediately shifted, usually without the patient awakening.  
       Thyroid hormone replacement therapy In patients with hypothyroidism and SDB, thyroid hormone replacement therapy is usually accompanied by an improvement in the SDB.  
       Using a mouthpiece In some individuals, a mouthpiece may improve the anatomy of the airway to the point where snoring or mild obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) can be corrected. Many types of oral appliances have been designed for the treatment of sleep apnea. Most are custom fitted to the teeth of both dental arches to reposition the mandible and to enlarge the retropalatal and retrolingual airway space. However, consistent patient tolerance for this treatment is relatively low, and it is less effective than CPAP in reducing the frequency of apnea and hypopnea. [ 
       Consultations Multidisciplinary sleep teams, including pulmonologists, otolaryngologists, neurologists, and oral-maxillofacial surgeons, may offer the most convenient and comprehensive treatment for these patients.  
       Dietary measures Diet and exercise counseling play a major role in the initial therapy for SDB. Weight reduction in the patient with obesity can dramatically improve SDB. Even a modest weight loss can have quite a beneficial effect on the frequency of apneas and hypopneas. Bariatric surgery may be needed in some cases. When rapid weight loss occurs after bariatric surgery or successful dieting, the pressure for overcoming apneas and hypopneas is likely to decrease, so retesting is recommended.  
     Treatment with Nasal CPAP 
       When none of the above therapies are appropriate or helpful, nasal continuous positive airway pressure (n-CPAP) is the most effective method to manage obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS). [ n-CPAP provides a pneumatic stent for the upper airway, eliminating the airway collapse during inspiration. It is administered by a soft mask that covers the nose only. Sufficient pressure is introduced to eliminate apneas, hypopneas, and snoring. An image depicting a CPAP machine can be seen below.  
         CPAP machine.  CPAP machine.  Most physicians agree that patients with a respiratory disturbance index (RDI) higher than 20 require treatment. n-CPAP can also be useful for patients with a lower RDI, especially if they experience daytime sleepiness or other symptoms. If the severity of the daytime symptoms and the Epworth Sleepiness Scale score are much greater than would be expected with a particular RDI, a trial of n-CPAP can help determine whether elimination of the SDB leads to improvement of the daytime symptoms or if other factors contribute to the daytime symptoms.  Patients who are unlikely to benefit from n-CPAP include those with such severe nasal obstruction that n-CPAP cannot be used, patients with such extreme claustrophobia that they cannot tolerate a nasal mask, and patients in whom n-CPAP does not reliably eliminate apneas, hypopneas, and snoring.  
       Determination of positive airway pressure required The criterion standard for determining the amount of pressure required to restore upper-airway patency is traditionally determined during polysomnography (PSG) by trained technicians. In some centers, this is performed as a split-night study, with data from the first half of the night used for diagnosis of SDB. Once this diagnosis is made, if the RDI is sufficient to suggest benefit from initiation of n-CPAP (usually an RDI of 20 or higher), the second half of the night’s study is used to determine the optimal amount of pressure.  The disadvantage of the split-night approach is that the second half of a full night study often reveals more severe sleep apnea, so a diagnostic study limited to the first half of the night can underestimate disease severity.  The amount of pressure delivered is reported as cm water. An average starting point for CPAP would be 8-10 cm water. Patients report that pressures at these levels feel odd but are tolerable even when beginning treatment and become more tolerable as the patients become accustomed to treatment. Higher levels (>15 cm water) are often not well tolerated.  When a second overnight study is logistically difficult, some clinicians empirically start a patient on n-CPAP with a pressure of 8-10 cm water. A new generation of n-CPAP machines, on the basis of the patterns of inspiratory airflow, can sense the amount of pressure needed to overcome upper airway resistance. Patients are sometimes started using these machines without a prior titration study. [ Alternatively, an autotitrating machine can be used for several nights, the record of amount of pressure required to suppress apneas and hypopneas can be downloaded and studied, and a suitable nightly pressure can be determined in this fashion. Also, the amount of pressure required to suppress snoring can be used as an audible guide to appropriate pressures.  A patient who routinely takes sedatives or ingests alcohol during the evening and does not intend to change this should probably be tested after continuing their usual nightly routine. n-CPAP titration without sedatives or alcohol is likely to lead to undertreatment of the SDB at home, when such patterns are resumed.  
       Effects of n-CPAP Most patients feel better during the daytime on the first day after beginning n-CPAP. During the first week of treatment, most experience rebound sleep with prolonged episodes of REM sleep. Sleep patterns become more normal after the first week. For these reasons, several weeks of n-CPAP use may be helpful for normalization of sleep patterns in patients with severe sleep apnea who plan to undergo surgery. Sleep patterns should be normalized prior to the planned surgery.  Regular use of n-CPAP improves both the patients’ and their bed partners’ quality of life. [ [ Other effects of using CPAP include increased vagal tone, increased cardiac output, increased stroke volume, decreased systemic vascular resistance, and reduced risk of cardiovascular mortality. [ Patients with OSA often have increased arterial stiffness and sympathovagal imbalance. CPAP therapy is reported to have beneficial effects on the vascular function in such patients: improvement of the sympathovagal balance by CPAP therapy may be significantly related to decreased stiffness of the central to middle-sized arteries, independent of the changes in the blood pressure and vascular endothelial status. [ Repetitive obstructive apnea produces acute impairment of left ventricular longitudinal function, suggesting the development of subendocardial ischemia. CPAP therapy not only decreases the severity of OSA but also ameliorates sleep-induced longitudinal left ventricular dysfunction.  
       Problems with n-CPAP One problem with n-CPAP is that although n-CPAP provides good improvement in symptoms and physiologic parameters, compliance with treatment is not good, with regular use sometimes estimated as low as 30% (46% in one study defining use as at least 4 h/d, 5 d/wk). Noncompliance has been categorized by Zoula et al as tolerance problems, psychological problems, and lack of instruction, support, or follow-up. [ Tolerance problems may be due to side effects (ie, dry mouth, conjunctivitis, rhinorrhea, skin irritation, pressure sores, nasal congestion, epistaxis), mask leaks, difficulty exhaling, aerophagia, chest discomfort, and bed-partner intolerance. [ Many patients report claustrophobia. They find that the sensation of covering the nose with a mask makes them so uncomfortable that they cannot tolerate wearing the n-CPAP. Sometimes this can be helped with a smaller or more transparent mask design. Use of nasal pillows (inserted into the nostrils) instead of a formal nasal mask may allow such patients to tolerate the n-CPAP.  Some patients have trouble tolerating the initial pressure. Especially when higher pressures (>12-13 cm water) are required for elimination of apneas and hypopneas, this level of pressure may be uncomfortable. Many n-CPAP machines have a built-in ramp or gradual increase in pressure. Using this feature, the mask can be placed and pressure begun at a very low and easily tolerated level. Over 30 minutes, the pressure gradually builds to the full amount necessary. Often, the patient can fall asleep during this time. Full pressure is not used until the patient is actually asleep.  Patients may experience nasal obstruction. Evaluation by an otolaryngologist reveals whether this is predominantly a fixed skeletal obstruction or a soft tissue obstruction potentially modifiable without surgery. Marked septal deviation or turbinate hypertrophy usually requires surgery for resolution. Alar collapse may be adequately treated by internal or external dilators (eg, Breathe Right strip, Nozovent). Surgery is sometimes required for repair of marked alar collapse.  Mucosal edema may be due to allergic rhinosinusitis or to vasomotor or irritative rhinitis. Allergy testing and treatment and pharmacotherapy trials (eg, topical steroids or antihistamines, oral antihistamines, or decongestants) may be beneficial.  One way to determine whether sufficient potentially reversible mucosal edema exists to pursue that avenue of treatment is the topical decongestant test. The patient uses a nasal topical decongestant (eg, oxymetazoline) at bedtime for several days, with the patient and bed partner observing for any improvements in snoring or apneas. A marked improvement suggests potentially reversible mucosal edema as a main contributor to the nasal obstruction. Failure to improve suggests a fixed skeletal obstruction that requires surgical correction.  Sometimes the dryness of the air or its temperature may be irritating to the patient. Use of in-line humidification and warming of the inspired air may alleviate patient discomfort. [ A number of patients report facial or nasal pain. Sometimes this pain can be related to a poorly fitting mask. With the many different types of masks available now, different styles and sizes can be tried to select the optimal fit for each individual anatomy. Because the mask is pulled tight against the face, an edentulous anterior maxilla may not provide the resistance necessary for a good fit. Leaving dentures in at night can help with this.  If the facial or nasal pain persists despite mask refitting, evaluation for nasal obstruction or chronic sinusitis may be helpful. The CPAP Pro delivery method anchors the tubing to a platform based on an upper retainer, obviating the need for a forehead strap.  Patients may experience dry eye or other eye discomfort. If the mask does not seal well, egress of pressurized air from the upper end of the mask toward the eye may occur, causing dry eye or even exposure keratitis. Mask refitting usually eliminates this problem.  Patients may sleep with the mouth falling open, awakening with dry mouth. Sometimes a chin strap is required to prevent the mouth from opening at night. A commercially available disposable adhesive bandage may used to pull the chin up toward the lower cheeks. [ Patients may experience epistaxis. This may be related to the high-flow dry air and may be helped by humidification and warming of the inspired air.  Some patients experience nasal drying. Forced dry air can be irritating to the nose, encouraging mucosal inflammation and crusting. Use of humidified air for n-CPAP usually eliminates this problem.  Other problems may also occur. Pneumopericardium has been reported with n-CPAP. [ Rigorous patient education and early reinforcing follow-up may improve long-term use of n-CPAP. 
       Other considerations Variations of air pressure delivery can sometimes make n-CPAP use more comfortable for patients. Autotitrating positive airway pressure (APAP) continually adjusts the pressure to barely overcome the collapsing forces. Bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP) provides higher pressure during inspiration (when the pneumatic splint is needed to prevent obstructive airway collapse) and lower pressure during expiration. C-Flex is another autoadjusting delivery method that increases pressure toward the end of expirations, as collapse would usually begin, and decreases pressure during early expiration.  Patients who require higher pressures to overcome obstructive apneas may tolerate these devices better than the one-level n-CPAP, which delivers the higher pressure throughout the entire respiratory cycle.  Following treatment with CPAP, some patients with obstructive sleep apnea remain sleepy despite effective CPAP, and attention should be paid to other diagnoses that can be associated to sleepiness. The so called “post-CPAP sleepiness,” as a specific disorder, may not exist.  
     Oxygen 
       Because some of the effects of sleep-disordered breathing (SDB) are due to hypoxia during sleep, the administration of oxygen would seem like a reasonable treatment. Although oxygen administration improves the lowest blood-oxygen saturation level during sleep and can improve some of the arrhythmias occurring during desaturation, repeated studies have not demonstrated sustained clinically significant improvement in SDB with oxygen administration. Some prolongation of apneas also occurs, particularly at the beginning of therapy.  Oxygen administration may be beneficial in a subset of patients. Some patients with other coexistent pulmonary disorders may also benefit from use of oxygen in conjunction with nasal continuous positive airway pressure (n-CPAP).  
     Pharmacologic Treatments 
       Protriptyline Protriptyline, a tricyclic antidepressant, is the medication most studied in the treatment of SDB and does yield improvement in patients with this condition. This effect, however, appears to be mainly due to suppression of rapid eye movement (REM) sleep. Because sleep-disordered breathing (SDB) is often most severe during REM sleep, less REM sleep can mean fewer apneas.  
       Modafinil Modafinil is a wake-promoting medication used in association with continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) to treat patients with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS). It has an action similar to that of sympathomimetic agents (like amphetamine and methylphenidate), although its pharmacologic profile is not identical to that of sympathomimetic amines. The precise mechanism through which modafinil promotes wakefulness is unknown.  Headache and nervousness are the only adverse events reported. There is no benefit using Modafinil in patients with OSA who are not compliant with CPAP, so it should not be administrated in such cases.  
       Other drugs Other drugs that have been investigated for treatment of sleep apnea include progestational agents, aminophylline, acetazolamide, L-tryptophan, naloxone, baclofen, bromocriptine, chlorimipramine, and prochlorperazine. None of these have shown a consistently helpful effect on sleep-disordered breathing (SDB).  
     Surgical Management of SDB 
       Surgical care of sleep-disordered breathing (SDB) is discussed more fully in  Snoring and Obstructive Sleep Apnea, Surgery Alcohol significantly worsens SDB. Eliminating use of alcohol, especially near bedtime, improves SDB. [ 
     Further Outpatient Care 
       Nasal continuous positive airway pressure (n-CPAP) does not cure or alter the underlying obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) but rather provides daily relief from the apneas, snoring, hypoxias, and consequent daytime symptoms. After long-term n-CPAP use, a carry-over effect is often noted; therefore, polysomnography (PSG) results on the first day or two off n-CPAP look remarkably improved. However, this carry-over is short lived, and usually within a week, the snoring, apneas, hypoxias, and daytime symptoms have returned to their original level.  n-CPAP is highly successful in managing OSA, as long as it is used. Unfortunately, compliance with n-CPAP use is not great, with use for at least 4 hours a night on 5 of 7 nights occurring in only about one half of patients. For this reason, regular follow-up visits are mandatory for ensuring continued successful treatment.  Some physicians see patients on a 3- to 4-month basis during their first year of n-CPAP use and yearly thereafter. Repeat sleep studies are obtained after major weight loss or gain or after major change in daytime symptoms. Many patients happily and successfully use n-CPAP for years. Others find sustained use impossible. These are the patients for whom surgery may be helpful.  Even snorers whose PSG does not show SDB should be monitored periodically because they can progress to SDB with time, even without weight gain.  
     start media 
       
         CPAP machine.  CPAP machine.  
     
       Author 
         Vittorio Rinaldi, MD Specialist in Otolaryngology, Division of Otolaryngology, Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, University of Milan, Fondazione I.R.C.C.S. Cà Granda, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Coauthor(s) 
         Fabrizio Salvinelli, MD Professor of Otolaryngology, Campus Bio-Medico, University of Rome Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
         Manuele Casale, MD Specialist in Otolaryngology, Campus Bio-Medico, University of Rome School of Medicine Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
         Francesco Faiella, MD Resident in Otolaryngology, Campus Bio-Medico University of Rome School of Medicine Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
         Marco Pappacena, MD Resident, Department of Otolaryngology, Campus Bio-Medico University, Rome Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Pharmacy Editor 
         Francisco Talavera, PharmD, PhD Adjunct Assistant Professor, University of Nebraska Medical Center College of Pharmacy; Editor-in-Chief, Medscape Drug Reference Disclosure: Received salary from Medscape for employment. for: Medscape. 
       Managing Editor 
         Robert M Kellman, MD Professor and Chair, Department of Otolaryngology and Communication Sciences, State University of New York Upstate Medical University Robert M Kellman, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American Academy of Facial Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery American Head and Neck Society American Rhinologic Society Triological Society American Neurotology Society American Academy of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery American College of Surgeons American Medical Association Medical Society of the State of New York Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Chief Editor 
         Zab Mosenifar, MD, FACP, FCCP Geri and Richard Brawerman Chair in Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Professor and Executive Vice Chairman, Department of Medicine, Medical Director, Women's Guild Lung Institute, Cedars Sinai Medical Center, University of California, Los Angeles, David Geffen School of Medicine Zab Mosenifar, MD, FACP, FCCP is a member of the following medical societies:  American College of Chest Physicians American College of Physicians American Federation for Medical Research American Thoracic Society Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Additional Contributors 
         Jack A Coleman, MD Consulting Staff, Franklin Surgical Associates Jack A Coleman, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American Academy of Facial Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery American Academy of Sleep Medicine American Academy of Otolaryngic Allergy American Academy of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery American Bronchoesophagological Association American College of Surgeons The Triological Society American Society for Laser Medicine and Surgery Association of Military Surgeons of the US Disclosure: Received honoraria from Accarent, Inc. for speaking and teaching. 
     Acknowledgements 
       The authors and editors of Medscape Reference gratefully acknowledge the contributions of previous author Karen Hall Calhoun, MD, to the development and writing of the source article The first author, Vittorio Rinaldi, gratefully thanks Prof P.G.Visvanathan for having introduced him to snoring and OSA surgical management.  
     
       Findley L, Unverzagt M, Guchu R, Fabrizio M, Buckner J, Suratt P. Vigilance and automobile accidents in patients with sleep apnea or narcolepsy.  Chest [Medline] 
       Terán-Santos J, Jiménez-Gómez A, Cordero-Guevara J. The association between sleep apnea and the risk of traffic accidents. Cooperative Group Burgos-Santander.  N Engl J Med [Medline] 
       Caples SM, Gami AS, Somers VK. Obstructive sleep apnea.  Ann Intern Med [Medline] 
       Eastwood PR,  Malhotra A,  Palmer LJ,  Kezirian EJ,  Horner RL,  Ip MS, et al. Obstructive Sleep Apnoea: From pathogenesis to treatment: Current controversies and future directions.  Respirology [Medline] 
       Flemons WW. Clinical practice. Obstructive sleep apnea.  N Engl J Med [Medline] 
       George CF. Diagnostic techniques in obstructive sleep apnea.  Prog Cardiovasc Dis [Medline] 
       Thakkar K, Yao M. Diagnostic studies in obstructive sleep apnea.  Otolaryngol Clin North Am [Medline] 
       Saletu M,  Sauter C,  Lalouschek W,  Saletu B,  Kapfhammer G,  Benesch T, et al. Is excessive daytime sleepiness a predictor of carotid atherosclerosis in sleep apnea?.  Atherosclerosis [Medline] 
       Exar EN, Collop NA. The upper airway resistance syndrome.  Chest [Medline] 
       Hudgel DW, Hendricks C, Hamilton HB. Characteristics of the upper airway pressure-flow relationship during sleep.  J Appl Physiol [Medline] 
       He J, Kryger MH, Zorick FJ, Conway W, Roth T. Mortality and apnea index in obstructive sleep apnea. Experience in 385 male patients.  Chest [Medline] 
       Remmers JE, deGroot WJ, Sauerland EK, Anch AM. Pathogenesis of upper airway occlusion during sleep.  J Appl Physiol [Medline] 
       Casale M,  Rinaldi V,  Bressi F,  Di Peco V,  Baptista P,  Sadun B, et al. A suitable test for identifying high risk adult patients of moderate-severe obstructive sleep apnea syndrome.  Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci [Medline] 
       Casale M, Pappacena M, Rinaldi V, Bressi F, Baptista P, Salvinelli F. Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome: from phenotype to genetic basis.  Curr Genomics [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Bekci TT, Kocak N, Kesli R. Distribution of common methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase gene mutations in patients with obstructive sleep apnoea.  J Int Med Res [Medline] 
       Manzotte T,  Guindalini C,  Mazzotti DR,  Palombini L,  de Souza AL,  Poyares D, et al. The human leucocyte antigen DQB1*0602 allele is associated with electroencephelograph differences in individuals with obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome.  J Sleep Res [Medline] 
       de Carvalho TB, Suman M, Molina FD, Piatto VB, Maniglia JV. Relationship of obstructive sleep apnea syndrome with the 5-HT2A receptor gene in Brazilian patients.  Sleep Breath [Medline] 
       O'Connor C, Thornley KS, Hanly PJ. Gender differences in the polysomnographic features of obstructive sleep apnea.  Am J Respir Crit Care Med [Medline] 
       Jordan AS, McEvoy RD. Gender differences in sleep apnea: epidemiology, clinical presentation and pathogenic mechanisms.  Sleep Med Rev [Medline] 
       Mohsenin V. Effects of gender on upper airway collapsibility and severity of obstructive sleep apnea.  Sleep Med [Medline] 
       Young T,  Shahar E,  Nieto FJ,  Redline S,  Newman AB,  Gottlieb DJ, et al. Predictors of sleep-disordered breathing in community-dwelling adults: the Sleep Heart Health Study.  Arch Intern Med [Medline] 
       Campos-Rodriguez F, Perez-Ronchel J, Grilo-Reina A, Lima-Alvarez J, Benitez MA, Almeida-Gonzalez C. Long-term effect of continuous positive airway pressure on BP in patients with hypertension and sleep apnea.  Chest [Medline] 
       Chowdhury M, Adams S, Whellan DJ. Sleep-disordered breathing and heart failure: focus on obstructive sleep apnea and treatment with continuous positive airway pressure.  J Card Fail [Medline] 
       Fletcher EC. Can the treatment of sleep apnea syndrome prevent the cardiovascular consequences?.  Sleep [Medline] 
       Haruki N,  Takeuchi M,  Kanazawa Y,  Tsubota N,  Shintome R,  Nakai H, et al. Continuous positive airway pressure ameliorates sleep-induced subclinical left ventricular systolic dysfunction: demonstration by two-dimensional speckle-tracking echocardiography.  Eur J Echocardiogr [Medline] 
       Wolf J, Lewicka J, Narkiewicz K. Obstructive sleep apnea: an update on mechanisms and cardiovascular consequences.  Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis [Medline] 
       Chami HA,  Fontes JD,  Vasan RS,  Keaney JF Jr,  O'Connor GT,  Larson MG, et al. Vascular inflammation and sleep disordered breathing in a community-based cohort.  Sleep [Medline] 
       Oliveras A, Schmieder RE. Clinical situations associated with difficult-to-control hypertension.  J Hypertens. Mar [Medline] 
       Cho ER, Kim H, Seo HS, Suh S, Lee SK, Shin C. Obstructive sleep apnoea as a risk factor for silent cerebral infarction.  J Sleep Res [Medline] 
       Young T, Blustein J, Finn L, Palta M. Sleep-disordered breathing and motor vehicle accidents in a population-based sample of employed adults.  Sleep [Medline] 
       Harsch IA,  Schahin SP,  Radespiel-Tröger M,  Weintz O,  Jahreiss H,  Fuchs FS, et al. Continuous positive airway pressure treatment rapidly improves insulin sensitivity in patients with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome.  Am J Respir Crit Care Med [Medline] 
       Hassaballa HA, Tulaimat A, Herdegen JJ, Mokhlesi B. The effect of continuous positive airway pressure on glucose control in diabetic patients with severe obstructive sleep apnea.  Sleep Breath [Medline] 
       Ip M, Mokhlesi B. Sleep and Glucose Intolerance/Diabetes Mellitus.  Sleep Med Clin [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Babu AR, Herdegen J, Fogelfeld L, Shott S, Mazzone T. Type 2 diabetes, glycemic control, and continuous positive airway pressure in obstructive sleep apnea.  Arch Intern Med [Medline] 
       Reichmuth KJ, Austin D, Skatrud JB, Young T. Association of sleep apnea and type II diabetes: a population-based study.  Am J Respir Crit Care Med [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Sadikot SM. An overview: Obstructive Sleep Apnea and the Metabolic Syndrome: Should ‘‘X’’ be changed to ‘‘Zzz. . zzzz. . Zzzz zzzzz. .Zzz’’?.  Diabetes & Metabolic Syndrome 
       Misiolek M,  Marek B,  Namyslowski G,  Scierski W,  Zwirska-Korczala K,  Kazmierczak-Zagorska Z, et al. Sleep apnea syndrome and snoring in patients with hypothyroidism with relation to overweight.  J Physiol Pharmacol [Medline] 
       Hoban TF. Sleep disorders in children.  Ann N Y Acad Sci [Medline] 
       Ciscar MA,  Juan G,  Martínez V,  Ramón M,  Lloret T,  Mínguez J, et al. Magnetic resonance imaging of the pharynx in OSA patients and healthy subjects.  Eur Respir J [Medline] 
       Fry JM, DiPhillipo MA, Curran K, Goldberg R, Baran AS. Full polysomnography in the home.  Sleep [Medline] 
       Chervin RD, Hedger K, Dillon JE, Pituch KJ. Pediatric sleep questionnaire (PSQ): validity and reliability of scales for sleep-disordered breathing, snoring, sleepiness, and behavioral problems.  Sleep Med [Medline] 
       Netzer NC, Stoohs RA, Netzer CM, Clark K, Strohl KP. Using the Berlin Questionnaire to identify patients at risk for the sleep apnea syndrome.  Ann Intern Med [Medline] 
       Ohayon MM, Guilleminault C, Priest RG, Caulet M. Snoring and breathing pauses during sleep: telephone interview survey of a United Kingdom population sample.  BMJ [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Roth T,  Zammit G,  Kushida C,  Doghramji K,  Mathias SD,  Wong JM, et al. A new questionnaire to detect sleep disorders.  Sleep Med [Medline] 
       Abrishami A, Khajehdehi A, Chung F. A systematic review of screening questionnaires for obstructive sleep apnea.  Can J Anaesth [Medline] 
       Emsellem HA, Corson WA, Rappaport BA, Hackett S, Smith LG, Hausfeld JN. Verification of sleep apnea using a portable sleep apnea screening device.  South Med J [Medline] 
       Stoohs R, Guilleminault C. MESAM 4: an ambulatory device for the detection of patients at risk for obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS).  Chest [Medline] 
       Weimin L, Rongguang W, Dongyan H, Xiaoli L, Wei J, Shiming Y. Assessment of a portable monitoring device WatchPAT 200 in the diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea.  Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol [Medline] 
       Berger G, Gilbey P, Hammel I, Ophir D. Histopathology of the uvula and the soft palate in patients with mild, moderate, and severe obstructive sleep apnea.  Laryngoscope [Medline] 
       Namyslowski G, Scierski W, Zembala-Nozynska E, Nozynski J, Misiolek M. [Histopathologic changes of the soft palate in snoring and obstructive sleep apnea syndrome patients].  Otolaryngol Pol [Medline] 
       Fishman G, Zemel M, DeRowe A, Sadot E, Sivan Y, Koltai PJ. Fiber-optic sleep endoscopy in children with persistent obstructive sleep apnea: inter-observer correlation and comparison with awake endoscopy.  Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol [Medline] 
       Campanini A, Canzi P, De Vito A, Dallan I, Montevecchi F, Vicini C. Awake versus sleep endoscopy: personal experience in 250 OSAHS patients.  Acta Otorhinolaryngol Ital [Medline] 
       Vicini C,  De Vito A,  Benazzo M,  Frassineti S,  Campanini A,  Frasconi P, et al. The nose oropharynx hypopharynx and larynx (NOHL) classification: a new system of diagnostic standardized examination for OSAHS patients.  Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol [Medline] 
       Peppard PE, Young T, Palta M, Dempsey J, Skatrud J. Longitudinal study of moderate weight change and sleep-disordered breathing.  JAMA [Medline] 
       Victor LD. Treatment of obstructive sleep apnea in primary care.  Am Fam Physician [Medline] 
       Chan AS, Lee RW, Cistulli PA. Dental appliance treatment for obstructive sleep apnea.  Chest [Medline] 
       Aloia MS, Stanchina M, Arnedt JT, Malhotra A, Millman RP. Treatment adherence and outcomes in flexible vs standard continuous positive airway pressure therapy.  Chest [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Berkani M,  Lofaso F,  Chouaid C,  Pia d'Ortho M,  Theret D,  Grillier-Lanoir V, et al. CPAP titration by an auto-CPAP device based on snoring detection: a clinical trial and economic considerations.  Eur Respir J [Medline] 
       Douglas NJ. Systematic review of the efficacy of nasal CPAP.  Thorax [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Fleisher KE, Krieger AC. Current trends in the treatment of obstructive sleep apnea.  J Oral Maxillofac Surg [Medline] 
       Grunstein RR. Sleep-related breathing disorders. 5. Nasal continuous positive airway pressure treatment for obstructive sleep apnoea.  Thorax [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Kawahara S, Akashiba T, Akahoshi T, Horie T. Nasal CPAP improves the quality of life and lessens the depressive symptoms in patients with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome.  Intern Med [Medline] 
       Lankford DA, Proctor CD, Richard R. Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) changes in bariatric surgery patients undergoing rapid weight loss.  Obes Surg [Medline] 
       McArdle N, Devereux G, Heidarnejad H, Engleman HM, Mackay TW, Douglas NJ. Long-term use of CPAP therapy for sleep apnea/hypopnea syndrome.  Am J Respir Crit Care Med [Medline] 
       Ryan S, McNicholas W. The effect of continuous positive airway pressure on C-reactive protein levels in patients with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome.  Chest [Medline] 
       Schwartz DJ, Kohler WC, Karatinos G. Symptoms of depression in individuals with obstructive sleep apnea may be amenable to treatment with continuous positive airway pressure.  Chest [Medline] 
       Stammnitz A, Jerrentrup A, Penzel T, Peter JH, Vogelmeier C, Becker HF. Automatic CPAP titration with different self-setting devices in patients with obstructive sleep apnoea.  Eur Respir J [Medline] 
       Stradling JR, Hardinge M, Smith DM. A novel, simplified approach to starting nasal CPAP therapy in OSA.  Respir Med [Medline] 
       Teschler H, Berthon-Jones M. Intelligent CPAP systems: clinical experience.  Thorax [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Weaver TE,  Kribbs NB,  Pack AI,  Kline LR,  Chugh DK,  Maislin G, et al. Night-to-night variability in CPAP use over the first three months of treatment.  Sleep [Medline] 
       Lévy P, Pepin JL. Auto-CPAP: an effective and low-cost procedure in the management of OSAS?.  Eur Respir J [Medline] 
       Morgenthaler TI,  Aurora RN,  Brown T,  Zak R,  Alessi C,  Boehlecke B, et al. Practice parameters for the use of autotitrating continuous positive airway pressure devices for titrating pressures and treating adult patients with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome: an update for 2007. An American Academy of Sleep Medicine report.  Sleep [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Doherty LS, Kiely JL, Lawless G, McNicholas WT. Impact of nasal continuous positive airway pressure therapy on the quality of life of bed partners of patients with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome.  Chest [Medline] 
       Flemons WW, Tsai W. Quality of life consequences of sleep-disordered breathing.  J Allergy Clin Immunol [Medline] 
       Moyer CA, Sonnad SS, Garetz SL, Helman JI, Chervin RD. Quality of life in obstructive sleep apnea: a systematic review of the literature.  Sleep Med [Medline] 
       Ciftci TU, Ciftci B, Guven SF, Kokturk O, Turktas H. Effect of nasal continuous positive airway pressure in uncontrolled nocturnal asthmatic patients with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome.  Respir Med [Medline] 
       Stradling JR, Smith D, Crosby J. Post-CPAP sleepiness--a specific syndrome?.  J Sleep Res [Medline] 
       Shiina K,  Tomiyama H,  Takata Y,  Yoshida M,  Kato K,  Saruhara H, et al. Effects of CPAP therapy on the sympathovagal balance and arterial stiffness in obstructive sleep apnea.  Respir Med [Medline] 
       Jean Wiese H, Boethel C, Phillips B, Wilson JF, Peters J, Viggiano T. CPAP compliance: video education may help!.  Sleep Med [Medline] 
       Marshall NS, Neill AM, Campbell AJ, Sheppard DS. Randomised controlled crossover trial of humidified continuous positive airway pressure in mild obstructive sleep apnoea.  Thorax [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Neill AM, Wai HS, Bannan SP, Beasley CR, Weatherall M, Campbell AJ. Humidified nasal continuous positive airway pressure in obstructive sleep apnoea.  Eur Respir J [Medline] 
       Bachour A, Hurmerinta K, Maasilta P. Mouth closing device (chinstrap) reduces mouth leak during nasal CPAP.  Sleep Med [Medline] 
       McEachern RC, Patel RG. Pneumopericardium associated with face-mask continuous positive airway pressure.  Chest [Medline] 
       Souter MA, Stevenson S, Sparks B, Drennan C. Upper airway surgery benefits patients with obstructive sleep apnoea who cannot tolerate nasal continuous positive airway pressure.  J Laryngol Otol [Medline]

Article 28:

   
     Neonatal Pustular Melanosis 
       Neonatal Pustular Melanosis: Background, Epidemiology Neonatal Pustular Melanosis Clinical Presentation: Physical, Causes Neonatal Pustular Melanosis Differential Diagnoses Neonatal Pustular Melanosis Workup: Laboratory Studies Neonatal Pustular Melanosis Treatment & Management: Medical Care Neonatal Pustular Melanosis Medication Neonatal Pustular Melanosis Follow-up: Further Inpatient Care, Prognosis 
       Neonatal Pustular Melanosis: Background, Epidemiology Neonatal Pustular Melanosis Clinical Presentation: Physical, Causes Neonatal Pustular Melanosis Differential Diagnoses Neonatal Pustular Melanosis Workup: Laboratory Studies Neonatal Pustular Melanosis Treatment & Management: Medical Care Neonatal Pustular Melanosis Medication Neonatal Pustular Melanosis Follow-up: Further Inpatient Care, Prognosis 
       Overview
 Background Epidemiology Presentation
 Physical Causes Differential Diagnoses
 Workup
 Laboratory Studies Treatment
 Medical Care Medication
 Follow-up
 Further Inpatient Care Prognosis 
       Neonatal Pustular Melanosis Overview Neonatal Pustular Melanosis Clinical Presentation Neonatal Pustular Melanosis Differential Diagnoses Neonatal Pustular Melanosis Workup Neonatal Pustular Melanosis Treatment Neonatal Pustular Melanosis Medication Neonatal Pustular Melanosis Follow-up 909753-overview Nov 04, 2014 2015-08-03-17:34 0 Pediatrics: General Medicine 2002 Diseases & Conditions Condition 
       1 2 content 909753 502 9 age12 
     Jun 05, 2015 
       condition Diseases & Conditions 
       pediatrics_general Pediatrics: General Medicine 
       pediatrics_general_dermatology Dermatology neonatal pustular melanosis, transient pustular melanosis of the newborn, pustular melanosis, lesions, vesicles, macules, rash, pemphigus neonatorum, lentiginosis neonatorum, flaking epidermis, macules, skin rash, diagnosis Transient neonatal pustular melanosis is a benign, self-limited condition of unknown etiology. Historically, the disorder was lumped together with vesicular and bullous lesions and called pemphigus neonatorum. 1 Neonatal Pustular Melanosis 
     Overview 
       Background 
         Transient neonatal pustular melanosis is a benign, self-limited condition of unknown etiology. [ 
           Ruptured pustules and vesicles with remaining characteristic collarette of scale and brown... Ruptured pustules and vesicles with remaining characteristic collarette of scale and brown hyperpigmented macules. Courtesy of Anthony J. Mancini, MD.  
       Epidemiology 
         Frequency 
           United States Few reports of large numbers of screened infants are available; however, incidence has been reported to be as much as 2.2% in white infants and 4.4% in black infants.  
         Mortality/Morbidity Neonatal pustular melanosis is a completely benign condition that is not known to cause any long-term sequelae. [ 
         Race Transient neonatal pustular melanosis is common in black infants. It can be observed in all racial groups, especially those with darker constitutive pigmentation, Latinos, South Asians, and those of Mediterranean extraction.  
         Age The eruption is almost always present at birth but the clinical appearance or stage may vary. 
     Clinical Presentation 
       Physical 
         The primary lesions in neonatal pustular melanosis progress through 3 stages of development. Initially, they appear as rather uniform round 2-mm to 4-mm nonerythematous pustules. They are not clear vesicles; rather, they contain milky, purulent exudate. The pustules rupture easily. They are frequently missed because they are superficial and are usually wiped off easily in the delivery suite when the newborn is cleansed of vernix. Pustules on the thicker areas of skin such as the knees or palms may persist for several days. [ Next, a delicate collarette of thin white scale is left around the perimeter of each denuded pustule. Near-term infants, especially those delivered by cesarean delivery, may exhibit just the unbroken pustules, and term infants may have only macules remaining, usually with the telltale collarette of flaking epidermis. Lastly, within hours of exposure to the terrestrial environment, the central pigmented brown macule becomes apparent. The macules are round, have smooth and distinct borders, and are frequently confused for freckles. They may be profuse or sparse and typically are found under the chin and on the neck, upper chest, back, and buttocks. Occasionally, the palms, soles, and scalp are affected. When considering suspected neonatal pustular melanosis, the following should also be considered: 
           
             Erythema toxicum neonatorum: These lesions are small papules on an erythematous base, contain predominantly eosinophils, and do not heal with postinflammatory hyperpigmentation.  
             Congenital cutaneous candidiasis: The pustules are usually very inflamed and contain organisms on laboratory smear or biopsy. 
             Impetigo 
             Congenital Langherhans cell histiocytosis: Widely distributed papules and pustules form adherent crusts, not frecklelike macules. 
             Congenital  varicella 
             Miliaria: This characterized by clear vesicles (crystallina) or pustules (pustulosa) that erupt in a setting of hyperthermia. 
             Herpes simplex 
             Milia 
             Acropustulosis: The pustules predominate on the palms and soles and are not present at birth. 
       Causes 
         The etiology is unknown. Some reports have described cases that evolved into erythema toxicum neonatorum; [ 
     Differential Diagnoses 
       
         Candidiasis in Emergency Medicine 
         Miliaria 
         Pediatric Acropustulosis 
         Pediatric Erythema Toxicum 
         Pediatric Herpes Simplex Virus Infection 
         Pediatric Milia 
         Staphylococcus Aureus Infection 
     Workup 
       Laboratory Studies 
         If the appearance is typical of transient neonatal pustular melanosis, no further workup is indicated. If appearance is not typical, potassium hydroxide preparation, Gram stain, and Wright-Giemsa stain can support other diagnoses in the differential. In atypical cases, pustules can be cultured for bacteria and clustering of pustules should prompt polymerase chain reaction to identify possible herpes simplex. Wright-Giemsa stain of pustule contents demonstrates a predominance of neutrophils. Few, if any eosinophils are present. The brown macules are not true freckles or lentigines. Skin biopsy shows pigment incontinence characteristic of postinflammatory hyperpigmentation. The diagnosis of Langherhans cell histiocytosis can only be made by skin biopsy.  
     Treatment & Management 
       Medical Care 
         No treatment is indicated. Reassure parents that neonatal pustular melanosis is a benign finding and that it disappears. 
     Medication 
       Medication Summary Drug therapy currently is not a component of the standard of care for this condition. 
     Follow-up 
       Further Inpatient Care 
         The brown macules fade over a period of several months. 
       Prognosis 
         Neonatal pustular melanosis is self-limited. No morbidity is recognized. 
     start media 
       
         Ruptured pustules and vesicles with remaining characteristic collarette of scale and brown... Ruptured pustules and vesicles with remaining characteristic collarette of scale and brown hyperpigmented macules. Courtesy of Anthony J. Mancini, MD.  
     
       Author 
         Robert A Silverman, MD Clinical Associate Professor, Department of Pediatrics, Georgetown University Medical Center Robert A Silverman, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American Academy of Dermatology Society for Pediatric Dermatology Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Pharmacy Editor 
         Mary L Windle, PharmD Adjunct Associate Professor, University of Nebraska Medical Center College of Pharmacy; Editor-in-Chief, Medscape Drug Reference Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Managing Editor 
         Robert A Schwartz, MD, MPH Professor and Head of Dermatology, Professor of Pathology, Pediatrics, Medicine, and Preventive Medicine and Community Health, Rutgers New Jersey Medical School; Visiting Professor, Rutgers University School of Public Affairs and Administration Robert A Schwartz, MD, MPH is a member of the following medical societies:  Alpha Omega Alpha New York Academy of Medicine American Academy of Dermatology American College of Physicians Sigma Xi Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Chief Editor 
         Dirk M Elston, MD Professor and Chairman, Department of Dermatology and Dermatologic Surgery, Medical University of South Carolina College of Medicine
 Dirk M Elston, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American Academy of Dermatology Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Additional Contributors 
         Kevin P Connelly, DO Clinical Assistant Professor, Department of Pediatrics, Division of General Pediatrics and Emergency Care, Virginia Commonwealth University School of Medicine; Medical Director, Paws for Health Pet Visitation Program of the Richmond SPCA; Pediatric Emergency Physician, Emergency Consultants Inc, Chippenham Medical Center Kevin P Connelly, DO is a member of the following medical societies:  American Academy of Pediatrics American College of Osteopathic Pediatricians American Osteopathic Association Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
     Acknowledgements 
       The authors and editors at Medscape Reference gratefully acknowledge the contributions of previous author Elaine B St John, MD, to the original writing and development of this article.  
     
       Eichenfield LF, Frieden IJ, Esterly NB, eds.  Neonatal Dermatology 
       O'Connor NR, McLaughlin MR, Ham P. Newborn skin: Part I. Common rashes.  Am Fam Physician [Medline] 
       Chia PS, Leung C, Hsu YL, Lo CY. An infant with transient neonatal pustular melanosis presenting as pustules.  Pediatr Neonatol [Medline] 
       Goyal T, Varshney A, Bakshi SK. Incidence of Vesicobullous and Erosive Disorders of Neonates: Where and How Much to Worry?.  Indian J Pediatr [Medline] 
       Morgan AJ, Steen CJ, Schwartz RA, Janniger CK. Erythema toxicum neonatorum revisited.  Cutis [Medline] 
       Farnaroff AA, Martin RJ, eds. The skin.  Neonatal-Perinatal Medicine: Diseases of the Fetus and Infant 
       Ferrandiz C, Coroleu W, Ribera M, Lorenzo JC, Natal A. Sterile transient neonatal pustulosis is a precocious form of erythema toxicum neonatorum.  Dermatology [Medline] 
       Merlob P, Metzker A, Reisner SH. Transient neonatal pustular melanosis.  Am J Dis Child [Medline] 
       Ramamurthy RS, Reveri M, Esterly NB. Transient neonatal pustular melanosis.  J Pediatr [Medline]

Article 29:

   
     Physical Child Abuse 
       Physical Child Abuse: Practice Essentials, Background, Pathophysiology Physical Child Abuse Clinical Presentation: History, Physical, Causes Physical Child Abuse Differential Diagnoses Physical Child Abuse Workup: Laboratory Studies, Imaging Studies, Procedures Physical Child Abuse Treatment & Management: Medical Care, Surgical Care, Consultations Physical Child Abuse Follow-up: Patient Education 
       Physical Child Abuse: Practice Essentials, Background, Pathophysiology Physical Child Abuse Clinical Presentation: History, Physical, Causes Physical Child Abuse Differential Diagnoses Physical Child Abuse Workup: Laboratory Studies, Imaging Studies, Procedures Physical Child Abuse Treatment & Management: Medical Care, Surgical Care, Consultations Physical Child Abuse Follow-up: Patient Education 
       Overview
 Practice Essentials Background Pathophysiology Epidemiology Presentation
 History Physical Causes Differential Diagnoses
 Workup
 Laboratory Studies Imaging Studies Procedures Treatment
 Medical Care Surgical Care Consultations Follow-up
 Patient Education 
       Physical Child Abuse Overview Physical Child Abuse Clinical Presentation Physical Child Abuse Differential Diagnoses Physical Child Abuse Workup Physical Child Abuse Treatment Physical Child Abuse Follow-up 915664-overview May 14, 2015 2015-07-02-11:41 0 Pediatrics: Developmental and Behavioral Articles 2002 Diseases & Conditions Condition 
       1 2 content 915664 502 9 r458_diet1_f33_f1_age12 
     Jul 02, 2015 
       condition Diseases & Conditions 
       pediatrics_development Pediatrics: Developmental and Behavioral Articles 
       pediatrics_development_development Developmental and Behavioral Articles physical abuse, child maltreatment, child abuse, victimization, physical maltreatment, intentional injury, nonaccidental injury, inflicted injury, fracture, burn, bruise, subdural hematoma, SDH, abusive head trauma, AHT, shaken baby syndrome, SBS, shaking-impact syndrome, maltreatment, domestic violence, corporal punishment, fractures, corner fracture, battered child syndrome, whiplash syndrome, smoking, severe obesity, physical inactivity, depressed mood, suicide attempts, alcoholism, drug abuse, ischemic heart disease, cancer, stroke, chronic bronchitis, emphysema, diabetes, hepatitis, skeletal fractures Physical abuse, a subset of child abuse, is defined in various ways by different states. However, common to all definitions is the presence of an injury that the child sustains at the hands of his or her caregiver. 1 Physical Child Abuse 
     Overview 
       Practice Essentials 
         Physical child abuse (ie, nonaccidental injury that a child sustains at the hands of his or her caregiver) can result in skeletal injury, burns, bruising (see the first image below), and central nervous system injury from head trauma (see the second image below). To determine whether a child's injury was likely to have been inflicted rather than accidental, the clinician must establish the full extent of the injury and must understand the child's developmental level and abilities. 
           Bruises inflicted with belt. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  Bruises inflicted with belt. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  
           Acute subdural with shift. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  Acute subdural with shift. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  See  Pediatric Concussion and Other Traumatic Brain Injuries Also see the  12 Can't-Miss Findings on Pediatric Imaging Studies 
         Signs and symptoms Physical indicators that should raise suspicion for maltreatment include the following: 
           
             Injury pattern inconsistent with the history provided 
             Multiple injuries/multiple types of injuries 
             Injuries at various stages of healing 
             Poor hygiene 
             Presence of pathognomonic injuries, including loop marks; forced immersion burn pattern; and classic abusive head trauma findings of subdural hematoma, retina hemorrhage, and skeletal injuries Bruising over bony prominences is common in childhood, but patterns of bruising that raise the concern of possible abuse include the following: 
           
             Involvement of multiple areas of the body beyond bony prominences 
             Bruising of ears, facial cheeks, buttocks, palms, soles, neck, genitals 
             Bruises at many stages of healing 
             Bruises in nonambulatory child 
             Patterned markings resembling objects, grab marks, slap marks, human bites, and loop marks 
             Oral injury, lingular or labial frenula tears Skeletal injuries in children younger than 2 years may not be obvious; therefore, a skeletal survey screening is recommended. Many fracture types can be accidental or inflicted. Fractures that raise a high degree of suspicion for inflicted injury include the following: 
           
             Any fracture in a nonambulatory infant without clear accidental and consistent mechanism 
             Metaphyseal fractures 
             Multiple, bilateral, differently aged posterior rib fractures 
             Multiple and complex skull fractures if only simple impact history 
             Spinous process fractures 
             Scapular fractures Burn patterns that may suggest physical maltreatment include the following: 
           
             Patterned contact burns in clear shape of hot object (eg, fork, clothing iron, curling iron, cigarette lighter) 
             Classic forced immersion burn pattern with sharp stocking-and-glove demarcation and sparing of flexed protected areas 
             Splash/spill burn patterns not consistent with history or developmental level 
             Cigarette burns 
             Bilateral or mirror image burns 
             Localized burns to genitals, buttocks, and perineum (especially at toilet-training stage) 
             Evidence for excessive delay in seeking treatment, and the presence of other forms of injury See  Clinical Presentation 
         Diagnosis History and the physical examination findings determine which laboratory and diagnostic imaging studies are performed. [ 
           
             Bleeding problem: A basic bleeding evaluation (platelets, prothrombin time [PT], activated partial thromboplastin time [aPTT]) 
             Genetic bone disease or mineralization defect: Calcium, magnesium, phosphorus, and vitamin D levels; review of radiographs with a pediatric radiologist; genetic consultation, if available, may be warranted 
             Toxin or drug ingestion: toxicology screening [ Screening for abdominal injury is recommended in children younger than 5 years in whom abuse is suspected, even in the absence of clear external evidence of abdominal injury or symptoms such as pain or vomiting. Screening includes the following markers [ 
           
             Liver injury: Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 
             Pancreatic injury: Amylase and lipase levels 
             Urinary tract injury: Urine analysis for red blood 
             Intestinal injury: Stool guaiac Photodocumentation of cutaneous injuries, such as burns, bite marks, bruising, or other injuries, is very helpful in cases of child abuse. See  Workup 
         Management Treatment for physical abuse is a complex endeavor involving an interdisciplinary team approach. The nature of the injury determines the form of medical therapy, as follows: 
           
             Skeletal fractures of the long bones may require casting; orthopedics should be consulted 
             Burns vary in severity, and treatments range from cleansing the area to skin grafting; plastic surgery should be consulted for more serious burns; transfer to a burn unit may be indicated 
             The most severely injured children, such as those with CNS injury, may require resuscitation and will need intensive care; a multitude of specialists may need to be involved 
             Whenever abusive head trauma is suspected, ophthalmology should be consulted for a formal evaluation, including examination of the eyes for retinal hemorrhages. Psychosocial management that requires a significant amount of coordination among various services providers, including the physician and other health care providers, complements the medical management. The details of the caregiving environment determine the psychosocial supports needed to keep the child safe. See  Treatment Medication 
       Background 
         Physical abuse, a subset of child abuse, is defined in various ways by different states. However, common to all definitions is the presence of an injury that the child sustains at the hands of his or her caregiver. These injuries are also referred to as inflicted or nonaccidental injuries. Some states use broad definitions that encompass a wide range of injuries; other states use more narrow definitions that include specific signs and symptoms. Physical abuse can produce various injuries and injury patterns in children. This article focuses on several common examples of inflicted injury dealing with the skeleton (eg, fractures), skin (eg, burns, bruises), and CNS (eg, subdural hematoma [SDH], abusive head trauma [AHT], shaken baby syndrome [SBS]/shaking-impact syndrome). 
         Definitions of physical abuse The federally funded Fourth National Incidence Study (NIS-4) is a congressionally mandated effort of the United States Department of Health and Human Services to provide updated estimates of the incidence of child abuse and neglect in the United States and measure changes in incidence from the earlier studies. [ [ The advantage to a narrow definition is that it objectively states what is and is not physical abuse; however, such a clear delineation of circumstances likely fails to identify all possible cases of physical abuse (eg, pulling the child's hair, biting the child's skin). Definitions may also attempt to characterize the seriousness of injury; however, characterization is difficult because injuries vary greatly from mild redness on the buttocks that fades over several hours to injuries so severe that the child dies. Recent medical definitions focus more on the effect of the injury on the child and less on the perceived intention of the caregiver. Additionally, newer definitions also consider the sociocultural context in which the injury occurs; folk healing practices may cause the appearance of nonaccidental injury to the child. Finally, the effect of the physical abuse may not be limited to just the immediate injury findings. The National Center on Child Abuse and Neglect (NCCAN) estimated that 37% of children with maltreatment injuries developed a disability or special need, directly from the abusive actions or omissions of the child's caregivers. [ 
         Multifactorial nature of physical abuse No one single cause has been identified that explains the occurrence of all cases of physical abuse. The multifactorial nature of physical abuse requires a more comprehensive amalgam of models and conceptual frameworks to account for the heterogeneous set of cases classified as physical abuse. Circumstances that may give rise to the occurrence of a child's injury via physically abusive actions have been organized into a typology having the following 5 subtypes: 
           
             Caregiver's angry and uncontrolled disciplinary response to actual or perceived misconduct of the child 
             Caregiver's psychological impairment, which causes resentment and rejection of the child by the caregiver and a perception of the child as different and provocative 
             Child left in care of a babysitter who is abusive 
             Caregiver's use of substances that disinhibit behavior 
             Caregiver's entanglement in a domestic violence situation This typology describes commonly observed circumstances that may result in nonaccidental injury to children; however, it does not shed light on why the circumstance leads to a child's injury. 
         Ecological model of human development and interaction It is impossible and inadvisable to consider physical abuse of a child as an isolated incident with one cause and one effect. The ecological model of human development and interaction is generally regarded as an ideal conceptual framework from which to approach the complex interactions among the caregiver, child, family, social situation, and cultural values leading to the nonaccidental injury or physical abuse of the child. Note the image below. 
           Ecological model for understanding violence.  Ecological model for understanding violence.  The ecological model sees a child functioning within a family (microsystem), the family functioning within a community (exosystem), the various communities linked together by a set of sociocultural values that influence them (macrosystem), and all of these systems operating over time (chronosystem). Each of these system components is interactional in nature and affects one another. Similar events have different effects that depend on the period and circumstances in which the event occurs (eg, the child interacts and has an impact on the family, the family influences the child). 
         Environmental stress and caregiver frustration Helfer builds on this ecological viewpoint and states that physical maltreatment arises when a caregiver and child interact around an event, in a given environment, with the end result being injury to the child. [ The child may have certain characteristics that make providing care more complex; however, caution must be used in considering the child's contribution to the abusive interactions. A "difficult" child does not justify abusive treatment by a caregiver. Specific factors that may place the child at higher risk for physical maltreatment include prematurity, poor bonding with caregiver, medical fragility, various special needs ( attention deficit hyperactivity disorder Finally, the environment may contain stressors that may make the caregiving less than ideal and may overextend the coping abilities of the caregiver. While exploring the role of environmental stress and caregiver frustration in the occurrence of child abuse, Straus and Kantor found a complex interaction between the amount of stress present in the family setting and the response of the caregivers. [ Straus and Kantor concluded that human beings have a capacity for acting violently both in and outside the family setting. Physical abuse can result if a specific home situation arises that has a relatively high degree of stress and a baseline amount of violence within it (eg, spanking the children, pushing or slapping a spouse). Thus, risk of child abuse is related to the response of caregivers whose caregiving environment has a certain amount of overall risk for violent behavior. The caregivers' level of social connectedness to nonrelatives seems to have a role to play in the children's risk for maltreatment. Caregivers under high degrees of stress who did not participate in clubs, unions, and other organizations (ie, socially isolated) had higher rates of abusing children than those who were not as socially isolated. However, children whose caregivers had many family members living nearby did not achieve the same protective effect, as did the nonfamilial social connectedness group. 
         Domestic violence, intimate partner violence, corporal punishment, and child maltreatment The relationship of domestic violence or intimate partner violence (IPV) and child maltreatment is receiving increasing attention. Each year, between 3.3 and 10 million children witness episodes of family violence; 30-59% of mothers of abused children are victims of domestic violence or intimate partner violence. Additionally, children whose mothers are victims of domestic violence or intimate partner violence are 6-15 times more likely to be maltreated compared to children living in families in which their mothers are not being battered. The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends that pediatricians assess for the presence of domestic violence and intimate partner violence in the child's family and observes that intervening on behalf of the victimized parent (typically the child's mother) may be an effective child-abuse prevention strategy. [ 
           Overlap of child maltreatment and domestic violence.  Overlap of child maltreatment and domestic violence.  The relationship between the application of corporal punishment and risk for maltreatment remains an area of concern. Corporal punishment is defined as a discipline method that uses physical force as a behavioral modifier. Corporal punishment is nearly universal; 90% of US families report having used spanking as a means of discipline at some time. Corporal punishment has its roots in personal, cultural, religious, and societal views of children and how they are to be disciplined. Corporal punishment includes pinching, spanking, paddling, shoving, slapping, shaking, hair pulling, choking, excessive exercise, confinement in closed spaces, and denial of access to a toilet. No credible evidence in medical literature supports the continued use of corporal punishment; spanking is less effective than "time out" or removal of privileges for decreasing undesired behavior in children. Discipline, however, is a necessary component for child rearing, and appropriate discipline aims for limit setting, teaching right from wrong, assisting in decision making, and helping the child develop a sense of self-control. When physical force is used as a discipline technique (as in corporal punishment), the concern arises that if the misconduct continues even after corporal punishment is applied, the caregiver then may become angry and frustrated and reapply the physical force. As the physical force is reapplied while the caregiver is becoming increasingly angry, the potential emerges for the caregiver to lose control and injure the child. Regardless of whether injuring the child was the intended outcome of the corporal punishment, the end result experienced by the injured child is that he or she has been hurt. Caregivers who use corporal punishment are often angry, irritable, depressed, fatigued, and stressed. They apply the punishment at a time that they "have lost it," and caregivers frequently express remorse and agitation while punishing their children. To avoid this risk of harming the child and in order to model nonviolent behavior for children, many healthcare professionals advocate child discipline via consistent, nonphysical force based approaches such as "time out," loss of privileges, expressions of parental disappointment, and grounding. Approximately one half of US pediatricians report being opposed generally to the use of corporal punishment; about one third are completely opposed to its use (about three fourths of the pediatricians reported having been spanked when they were children). 
       Pathophysiology 
         Each form of injury sustained by a child as a result of physical abuse has its own set of biomechanics and pathophysiology. This article looks specifically at the mechanisms of injury for skeletal injury, burns, bruising, and CNS injury observed in abusive head trauma. Skeletal fractures are caused by the application of force to the bone. An essential step in the evaluation of injury in children is determining whether the injury being evaluated matches the history provided by the caregiver. This process requires understanding both the mechanisms and forces needed to cause specific types of fractures as well as specific characteristics of infant and childhood bone compared with adult bone. The child's immature skeleton is characterized by more porous/trabecular bone than in the mature bone. The less-dense porous bone tolerates more deformity than adult bone and accounts for the childhood bending and buckling injuries observed with green stick and buckle injuries. The periosteum (the fibrous membrane that covers the bone) is thicker and more easily elevated off the bone in children. The child's joint capsule and ligaments are strong and relatively more resistant to stress than the bone and cartilage, which accounts for less joint dislocations and ligamentous tears in childhood. Finally, bone healing is more rapid in children than in adults, which makes dating of childhood fractures more complicated. 
         Types of fractures While certain types of fractures (eg posterior rib, scapular, classic metaphyseal lesions) are more common in physical abuse than accidental injury, there is no fracture that is pathognomonic for child physical abuse. All fractures must be carefully evaluated and correlated with the child's medical history and with the history given by the caregivers. Fractures can be classified by location in the body (eg skull vs long bone) and then by location in the bone (eg diaphyseal vs metaphyseal, posterior vs anterior rib). Certain fracture types are only seen in developing, immature bone (eg, greenstick, classic metaphyseal lesions, Salter-Harris fractures). Specifically in long bones, fractures are described based on location and type. Diaphyseal fractures are breaks in the mid shaft of the long bones. Transverse fractures typically occur if the force is applied perpendicular to the long axis of the bone. Spiral or oblique fractures occur if the force applied has a rotational component. Buckle or compression fractures occur commonly at the transition from diaphysis to metaphysis. Note the images below. 
           Buckle fracture of distal femur without healing (acute).  Buckle fracture of distal femur without healing (acute).  
           Distal femur buckle fracture, 2-week follow-up film with sclerotic fracture line and periosteal... Distal femur buckle fracture, 2-week follow-up film with sclerotic fracture line and periosteal new bone healing.  Metaphyseal fractures (also called corner fractures or bucket handle fractures) are microfractures through the immature part of the bone edge and often appear like chips or corner fractures on radiographs. The metaphysis is an area of rapid bone turnover in the growing infant and toddler. Metaphyseal fractures are specific to infants as they involve the immature physis; they are caused by shearing and tensile stress seen in rapid acceleration and deceleration forces to the extremity. Skull bones may be fractured as a result of direct impact to the head with a solid surface or object. Skull fractures typically occur at the site of impact to the head, but owing to the oval shape of the head, a single point of impact may result in bilateral fractures remote from the site of impact. The skull bones differ from long bones in that they develop within a membrane and not from cartilage as do the long bones. Rib fractures may be observed in physical abuse as well. Rib fractures occur as a result of direct blows to the chest and via anteroposterior compression. Most abusive rib fractures are posterior, adjacent to the vertebral body, with the rib levering over the transverse process of the vertebra. 
         Bone healing and dating of injuries Dating of boney injuries is particularly important in the evaluation of physical abuse, because it may assist investigators in determining who had access to the child in the period the injury is estimated to have occurred. The body of medical literature evaluating the precision of dating of fractures has evolved over the last decade. The classic teaching has been that fractured long bones and ribs heal in a predictable manner, which is divided into the following 4 stages: initial healing, soft callus, hard callus, and remodeling. Orthopedic aspects of bone healing are described in  Forearm Fractures This traditional description of bone healing included general timelines for the age of the injury based on the stage of healing seen at the time of injury identification. In young children, bone healing tends to occur more rapidly than in older children and adults. Newer studies of dating of fractures, however, emphasize that the classic descriptions (eg, soft callus, hard callus) are based on histiologic specimens rather than plain film readings, and significant inconsistencies exist among radiologic interpretation of healing phases. [ Metaphyseal fractures are generally harder to date because of the relative lack of disruption in the periosteum at the time of the fracture. Skull fractures heal differently than do long bones because of their intramembranous nature; they do not heal with a large amount of callus formation and are more difficult to date. The skills and advice of an experienced pediatric radiologist should be consulted if dating of injuries becomes central to the maltreatment investigation. 
         Burns Burns arise from the application of heat energy to the child's skin. Various sources such as hot liquids (scalds), hot objects (contact or dry), flame (flash), chemicals, and electricity can generate heat. Three concentric zones of affected tissues have been identified. Coagulation is the most direct contact with the heat source in which the skin undergoes immediate coagulation necrosis as the proteins denature, and no cellular repair is possible. Stasis involves less heat energy exposure than with coagulation, and these cells, though injured, have some potential for repair. Hyperemia is the least direct injury, and these cells have the greatest potential for repair. All of these types and depth of burns can be encountered in both inflicted and accidental burns in children. Human skin is composed of 3 layers: the epidermis, dermis, and subcutaneous tissue. Burns are classified clinically depending on the depth of the injury and the involvement of the various skin layers. Superficial burns, which injure only the uppermost tissue of the epidermis, present as red, painful areas without blisters. Complete healing is expected from superficial burns. Deeper burns that extend through the epidermis into the upper levels of the dermis are referred to as partial thickness burns and present as painful blistering areas. Healing of partial-thickness burns varies, with various degrees of scarring depending on the level of tissue that is damaged. Finally, the deepest burns, full-thickness burns, extend past the epidermis and dermis and involve the subcutaneous tissue. These burns essentially have destroyed the overlying skin, blood vessels, and associated nerves and present as white, insensitive areas because of this destruction. A high degree of scarring and disfigurement result from full-thickness burns. Evaluation of suspicious burns in children must include, as with any medical complaint, a detailed history from the caregiver and child, including a developmental history to ensure the child is capable of contributing to the injury (eg, "turned on the faucet"). Physical examination should include assessment of the burned area; critical assessment of the burned versus spared areas of skin can be helpful in determining the position of the child at the time of the burn. Note the image below. 
           Series of 3 photos of likely accidental hot water scald burn on the leg of an infant. Sparing of... Series of 3 photos of likely accidental hot water scald burn on the leg of an infant. Sparing of skin-to-skin contact areas indicates child was flexed at the knee and ankle at the time of injury, which was consistent with being seated in the kitchen sink. Burn injuries require detailed scene investigation. In this case, investigators confirmed the ease of turning on the faucet and the high temperature of the water from it.  Careful gathering of information about what the child was wearing at the time, the time elapsed since the burn, symptom progression, and any topical treatments to the area is important in the determination of cause. Many childhood burns involve hot water in bathtubs or heated liquids in a kitchen setting. Scene investigations by child protective services and/or law enforcement can gather crucial information for determining whether the burn was inflicted or accidental burn (eg, temperature of tap water, height of faucets from floor, ease of turning handles, food residue on clothing or at the scene). Note the image below. 
           Pattern contact burn on buttocks of diapered child. The burn likely came from the metal grate... Pattern contact burn on buttocks of diapered child. The burn likely came from the metal grate surrounding heater.  
         Bruising Bruising occurs when blunt mechanical force is applied to the child's skin to such a degree that capillaries (and potentially larger vessels) become disrupted resulting in the leakage of blood into the subcutaneous tissue. The amount of blood and size and location of the involved area account for the appearance of the bruise. If force is applied via an object, the bruise may reflect the shape and geometry of the object. In general, a bruise progresses through a series of colors beginning with deep red, blue, or purple, then changes to a deep blue, then greenish, and, finally, resolves with a yellowish brown color. The various colors emanate from the breakdown of the extravascular blood into the components of hemoglobin. As the extravascular blood organizes itself and is resorbed, certain patterns of color change are expected; however, caution is advised because no clearly predictable chronology can be relied on with absolute certainty. Physicians should be cautious in offering dating information and, at most, only should suggest broad time ranges based on the clinical appearance and stages of healing of the bruise. Similar to fractures, recent data on dating of bruises indicate that color is a poor predictor of bruise age. [ 
         CNS trauma CNS trauma is among the most serious forms of injury that is observed in the context of physical abuse. CNS trauma may result in intracranial hemorrhage, including (1) epidural hemorrhage, which is bleeding into the space between inner skull bone surface and the dura, frequently due to a direct injury to the middle meningeal artery; (2) subdural hemorrhage, which is bleeding into the space between the inner surface of the dura and arachnoid membranes, typically caused by sheering of the bridging vessels that go from the brain surface to the dura; and (3) subarachnoid hemorrhage, which is bleeding into the space between the inner surface of the arachnoid and the brain surface. Other CNS injuries may include contusions (ie, direct injury to the brain tissue) and intraparenchymal bleeding (ie, bleeding directly into substance of the brain). These primary injuries can be obscured or complicated by anoxic brain injuries and swelling, which are frequently seen in complex head injury, whether accidental or inflicted. 
         AHT, SBS, and shaking-impact syndrome Discussing CNS injury and physical abuse inevitably leads to a discussion of abusive head trauma (AHT), previously referred to as shaken baby syndrome (SBS) or shaking-impact syndrome. [ AHT has been extended to include cases where the child's head is impacted against a surface, either soft or hard, and may be called AHT. Diffuse, serious brain injuries result from external forces that cause the rotation of the brain about its center of gravity. Such forces exceed those generated in normal childcare activities and are different from the low velocity translational forces (straight-line movement) that commonly occur in household falls. Immense angular deceleration forces may be generated with sudden striking of the child's head against a surface; these forces act on the brain tissue and cerebral vessels and generate the deleterious effect, which is not specifically from the contact forces applied to the skull. 
       Epidemiology 
         Frequency 
           United States It is important to understand the sources of data on child maltreatment incidence. The National Incidence Study (NIS) methodology views maltreated children who are investigated by child protective services (CPS) agencies as representing only the "tip of the iceberg;" thus, children investigated by CPS are included along with maltreated children who are identified by professionals in a wide range of agencies in representative communities. The Fourth National Incidence Study (NIS-4) uses data gathered from a nationally representative sample of 122 counties. CPS agencies in these counties provide data about all children in cases they accept for investigation during 1 of 2 reference periods (September 4, 2005 through December 3, 2005, or February 4, 2006 through May 3, 2006). Additionally, professionals in these same counties serve as NIS-4 sentinels and report data about maltreated children identified by the following organizations: elementary and secondary public schools; public health departments; public housing authorities; short-stay general and children's hospitals; state, county, and municipal police/sheriff departments; licensed daycare centers; juvenile probation departments; voluntary social services and mental health agencies; shelters for runaway and homeless youth; and shelters for victims of domestic violence. In 2009, approximately 3.3 million reports involving 5.9 million children were made to CPS agencies. Of these, 60.7% were accepted as needing further investigation, and, once evaluated, the investigations concluded that child abuse and neglect had affected approximately 695,000 children included in 754,000 cases of abuse (ie, some children with more than one episode of substantiated abuse), with 17.6% of this total representing cases of substantiated physical abuse. The most common form of substantiated abuse in 2009 was child neglect (including medical neglect), which accounted for 80.7% of cases, followed by child sexual abuse (9.2% of cases) and emotional maltreatment (8.1% of cases). [ The NIS-4 reported that of the approximately 1.25 million estimated annual cases of child abuse, approximately 323,000 cases were identified as physical abuse. [ It is important to recognize that these numbers reflect changes in the "Harm Standard" as defined by NIS, which is relatively stringent in that it generally requires that an act or omission result in demonstrable harm in order to be classified as abuse or neglect. NIS-4 also reported on the Endangerment Standard, which includes all children who meet the Harm Standard but adds others as well. The central feature of the Endangerment Standard is that it counts children who were not yet harmed by abuse or neglect if thought that the maltreatment endangered the children or if a CPS investigation substantiated or indicated their maltreatment. In addition, the Endangerment Standard is slightly more lenient than the Harm Standard in allowing a broader array of perpetrators, including adult caretakers other than parents in certain maltreatment categories and teenage caretakers as perpetrators of sexual abuse. Comparing the Endangerment Standard, the number of physically abused children decreased from an estimated 614,100 children in 1993 to 476,600 in 2006 (a 22% decrease in number, a 29% decline in the rate). The reasons behind this decrease are uncertain and may be a result of sample sizes in technique. These data should not be misinterpreted as an indication that physical abuse or endangerment of children has been "cured." NIS-4 data report that 1 child in every 58 in the United States was harmed under the Harm Standard definition, including physical abuse, sexual abuse, and neglect. In various clinical series, skeletal fractures are observed in approximately 30% of the children, burns are observed in 9-10%, bruises are quite common and are present in approximately 40% of child maltreatment cases, and inflicted CNS injury is observed in 24% of children treated for head injury. Finkelhor, Jones, and Shattuck have analyzed trends in reporting and substantiation rates for child abuse and neglect from the 1990s through 2010 and have identified a decline in the number of substantiated cases of physical abuse. [ 
           US maltreatment trends, 1990-2010.  US maltreatment trends, 1990-2010.  
         Mortality/Morbidity 
           Mortality According to the NIS-4 study, an estimated 2400 children were known to have died as a result of maltreatment from 2005-2006. According to Prevent Child Abuse America's National Center on Child Abuse Prevention Research, in 2006 an estimated 1,530 were known to have died as a result of child maltreatment, which is an average of 4 children each day of the year. [ 
           
             Child neglect - 43% 
             Multiple forms of maltreatment - 31.4% 
             Physical abuse - 22.4% 
             Psychological abuse - 2.9% 
             Child sexual abuse - 0.3% The estimated death rate for child abuse and neglect in the United States is 3 per 100,000 children. 
           Morbidity Different forms of injury have different risks. For example, CNS injury and occult abdominal injury in younger children are particularly serious. Bruises may be superficial or harbingers of more serious deeper injury. Burns observed in child maltreatment cases tend to be highly severe. Finally, skeletal injuries may be isolated or multiple in nature and may be associated with other injuries. DiScala and colleagues conducted a 10-year retrospective of medical records in the National Pediatric Trauma Registry (NPTR) from 1988-1997; it compared hospitalized, injured children younger than 5 years to determine differences between inflicted (n= 1,997) and accidental injuries (n= 16,831). [ DiScala's group found that compared with children who had accidental injury, children who were abused tended to be younger (12.8 mo vs 25.5 mo), were mainly injured by battering (53%) and shaking (10.3%), and were more likely to have a preinjury medical history of a medical problem or condition. The unintentionally injured children were mainly injured by falls (58.4%) and motor vehicles (37.1%). Note the image below. 
           National Pediatric Trauma Group registry findings.  National Pediatric Trauma Group registry findings.  In order to fully comprehend the morbidity of victims of child abuse victims, it is necessary to look beyond the immediate period of injury and recovery. Looking at potential long-term impacts on health and well being, Felitti et al explored the connection between exposure to childhood abuse and the connection between household dysfunction to subsequent health risks and the development of illness in adulthood in a series of studies referred to as the  Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACE) studies [ In order to assess exposure to child abuse and neglect, the ACE questionnaire asked about categories of child maltreatment, specifically psychological, physical, and sexual maltreatment. When asking about physical abuse, the questionnaire asked the patients if a parent or other adult in the household had (1) often or very often pushed, grabbed, shoved, or slapped them or (2) often or very often hit them so hard that marks or other injuries resulted. In order to assess exposure to household dysfunction, the ACE questionnaire asked questions by category of dysfunction, such as having a household member who had problems with substance abuse (eg, problem drinker, drug user), mental illness (eg, psychiatric problem), criminal behavior in household (eg, incarceration) or having a mother who was treated violently. In assessing if their mother was treated violently when the patient was a child, respondents were asked if their mother or step-mother was (1) sometimes or very often pushed, grabbed, slapped, bitten, hit with a fist, or hit with something hard or had something thrown at her or (2) was ever repeatedly hit for at least a few minutes or threatened with or hurt by a knife or gun. In addition to the questionnaire information, the standardized medical examination of the adults assessed risk factors and actual disease conditions. The risk factors included smoking, severe obesity, physical inactivity, depressed mood, suicide attempts, alcoholism, any drug abuse, a high lifetime number of sexual partners, and a history of sexually transmitted disease (STD). The disease conditions included ischemic heart disease, cancer, stroke, chronic bronchitis, emphysema, diabetes, hepatitis, and skeletal fractures. Once all the data were collected and analyzed, Felitti et al found that the most prevalent ACE was substance abuse (25.6%), the least prevalent ACE was criminal behavior (3.4%), and the prevalence of physical abuse was 10.8% and the prevalence of the mother being treated violently was 12.5%. Overall, 52% of the respondents had one or more ACEs and 6.2% had 4 or more ACEs. The following were findings in respondents who experienced 4 or more ACEs compared with those who had none: 
           
             Risk of alcoholism, drug abuse, depression, and suicide attempt increased 4-12 fold 
             Rates of smoking, poor self-rated health, and high number of sexual partners and STDs increased 2-4 fold 
             Physical inactivity and severe obesity increased 1.4-1.6 fold The major finding of the ACE studies was a graded relationship between the number of exposures to maltreatment and household dysfunction during childhood to the presence in later life of multiple risk factors and several disease conditions associated with death in adulthood. Note the image below. 
           Adverse child experiences pyramid.  Adverse child experiences pyramid.  Bentley and Widom (2009) found that physical abuse during childhood is a risk factor for obesity in adulthood. In a prospective assessment comparing individuals with documented histories of childhood physical and sexual abuse and neglect with a matched cohort of children without such histories, 30-year follow-up showed that childhood physical abuse led to significantly higher body mass index (BMI) scores in adulthood (beta = 0.14,  P P [ 
         Race No significant difference in incidence of physical abuse was noted based on race in both the 1993 NIS-3 and the 1986 NIS-2. In  Child Maltreatment 2010, [ NIS-4 compared 3 major categories of white (non-Hispanic), black (non-Hispanic), and Hispanic and found that white and black children differed significantly in their rates of experiencing overall Harm Standard abuse during the 2005–2006 NIS-4 study year. An estimated 10.4 cases per 1,000 black children suffered Harm Standard abuse during the NIS-44 study year, compared with 6 cases per 1,000 white children and 6.7 cases per 1,000 Hispanic children. The abuse rate of black children is 1.7 times that of white children and 1.6 times that of Hispanic children. 
         Sex NIS-4 found no significant difference between boys’ and girls’ rates of experiencing serious harm under the Harm Standard. Since the 1006 NIS-3 data, the incidence rates for both sexes declined, but the boys’ rate declined more than that of girls; the boys’ rate declined by 33%, whereas the girls’ rate declined by just 11%. A specific sex-based breakdown is not provided in  Child Maltreatment 2010 
         Age The NIS-4 incidence of Harm Standard physical abuse is significantly lower for the youngest children (2.5 cases per 1,000 children aged 0-2 y) compared with children aged 6-14 years (4.6 cases per 1,000 or higher). The fairly low incidence rates for children younger than 2 years may reflect a detection problem; because children who are younger than school age are less observable to community professionals, their abuse may avoid detection. In  Child Maltreatment 2010, [ 
     Clinical Presentation 
       History 
         Childhood is a time of accidental injuries. Understanding the developmental level and abilities of the child is essential in determining if the history provided by the parent or caregiver is a possible or plausible explanation for the child's injury. Once the full extent of the injury is determined based on physical examination, radiology, and laboratory workup, the healthcare provider can further assess the plausibility of the explanation offered by the parent or caregiver. A history that is implausible based on what a child at that level is capable of doing should raise a high degree of concern for possible maltreatment. Whenever a child is injured, a complete history of the circumstances surrounding the injury, as well as a detailed injury history, is essential. Basic questions include the following: 
           
             When was the child last 100% well? 
             What was the date and time of the injury and when was it first noted? 
             Where did the injury occur? 
             Who witnessed the injury? 
             What was happening prior to the injury? 
             What did the child do after the injury? 
             What did the caregiver do after the injury? 
             How long after the injury did the caregiver wait until seeking care for the child? 
             What symptoms was the child exhibiting, and what, if any, remedies did the caregiver attempt? 
             Inquire about specific details related to the injury, such as height of the fall, landing surface, and temperature of water (if scald burn), among others. The past medical history should be explored for general health and previous trauma and hospitalizations, as well as for the source of healthcare and developmental and social aspects of the child's life. In cases of maltreatment, the history is often inaccurate and misleading. The following historical elements should raise concerns for possible physical abuse: 
           
             Details change, or additional scenarios are suggested, as additional trauma is identified or as the cause of the trauma is questioned 
             Details are inconsistent among caregivers 
             Caregivers give implausible details not congruent with the trauma observed on examination 
             Caregivers describe minor trauma, but the child displays major injury on examination 
             No history of trauma is offered 
             Injury described as self-inflicted is not possible given the age/developmental abilities of the child 
             Caregivers demonstrate a significant delay in seeking treatment for the child 
             Serious injury is blamed on a younger sibling/playmate 
             Caregiver frequently changes healthcare facilities, pediatricians, or emergency departments 
       Physical 
         Physical examination of the child with an injury obviously is important, and the order of the complete examination is determined by the presenting condition of the child. Children with less severe injuries in stable condition can have the injured area examined last, since that area is most likely to be uncomfortable. Severely injured children in critical condition require life saving measures first, following the standards of care for trauma life-support; other components of the examination follow from that point. Because physical abuse is often an ongoing pattern of unsafe care, [ 
           
             Injury pattern inconsistent with the history provided 
             Multiple injuries/multiple types of injuries 
             Injuries at various stages of healing 
             Poor hygiene 
             Presence of pathognomonic injuries including loop marks; forced immersion burn pattern; and classic abusive head trauma findings of subdural hematoma, retina hemorrhage, and skeletal injuries Bruising over bony prominences is common in childhood, but patterns of bruising that raise the concern of possible abuse include the following: 
           
             Involvement of multiple areas of the body beyond bony prominences 
             Bruising of ears, facial cheeks, buttocks, palms, soles, neck, genitals (see images below) 
             Bruises at many stages of healing (see Bruising, in Pathophysiology) 
             Bruises in nonambulatory child 
             Patterned markings resembling objects, grab marks, slap marks, human bites, and loop marks (see images below) 
             Oral injury, lingular or labial frenula tears 
               Inflicted pinch mark shaft. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  Inflicted pinch mark shaft. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  
               Fingernail scratch in child with acute subdural with shift. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci... Fingernail scratch in child with acute subdural with shift. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  
               Example of ear bruising. Ear bruising is a rare accidental injury. This 10-month-old child was... Example of ear bruising. Ear bruising is a rare accidental injury. This 10-month-old child was intubated for abusive head trauma (AHT) and spiral femur fracture and had this ear bruising in addition to other facial bruising.  
               Linear inflicted bruising extending from arm to back, inflicted by a belt. Same child shown... Linear inflicted bruising extending from arm to back, inflicted by a belt. Same child shown again with back bruising.  
               Overlying linear inflicted marks, which the child disclosed came from a belt. Same child is... Overlying linear inflicted marks, which the child disclosed came from a belt. Same child is shown in image of arm and back.  
               Pattern bruising and extensive back bruising. The 4-year-old child was found dead in his home... Pattern bruising and extensive back bruising. The 4-year-old child was found dead in his home and had no reported history. Autopsy revealed duodenal hematoma and perforation as cause of death.  Skeletal injuries in children younger than 2 years may not be obvious; therefore, a skeletal survey screening is recommended (see Workup for the components of the skeletal survey). [ 
           
             ANY fracture in a nonambulatory infant without clear accidental and consistent mechanism 
             Metaphyseal fractures 
             Multiple, bilateral, differently aged posterior rib fractures (see image below) 
             Multiple and complex skull fractures if only simple impact history 
             Spinous process fractures 
             Scapular fractures 
               Radiograph of multiple rib fractures. Radiographs also revealed old radius and ulna fracture.... Radiograph of multiple rib fractures. Radiographs also revealed old radius and ulna fracture. The child presented with a slap mark. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  Burn patterns that may suggest physical maltreatment include the following: 
           
             Patterned contact burns in clear shape of hot object (eg, fork, clothing iron, curling iron, cigarette lighter) (see image below) 
             Classic forced immersion burn pattern with sharp stocking-and-glove demarcation and sparing of flexed protected areas 
             Splash/spill burn patterns not consistent with history or developmental level 
             Cigarette burns 
             Bilateral or mirror image burns 
             Localized burns to genitals, buttocks, and perineum (especially at toilet training stage) 
             Evidence for excessive delay in seeking treatment, and the presence of other forms of injury 
               Pattern contact burn on buttocks of diapered child. The burn likely came from the metal grate... Pattern contact burn on buttocks of diapered child. The burn likely came from the metal grate surrounding heater.  
       Causes 
         No one single cause has been identified that explains the occurrence of all cases of physical abuse. 
     Differential Diagnoses 
       Diagnostic Considerations Determining whether an injury was inflicted by a caregiver or caused by accidental means is more than a medical determination, and the current and future safety and well being of the child and family are at stake. Many medical conditions may mimic some of the findings observed in physical abuse, and the differential diagnoses to consider differ depending on the types of physical, laboratory, and radiographic findings observed. Differential diagnoses should be worked through carefully in cases of suspected inflicted injury so that suspected physical abuse can be diagnosed confidently and caregivers are not inappropriately accused of abuse. In all injuries, the major differential diagnosis is between accidental and inflicted injury. Determination of accident versus abuse is best accomplished by pairing thoughtful, thorough medical evaluation with information gathered through a multidisciplinary investigation, often involving child protective services (CPS) and law enforcement agencies. Child physical abuse guidelines from the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) were updated in 2015 and include new information on the lasting effects of abuse and highlight risk factors for abuse and abusive injuries that are frequently overlooked. [ Bruises For bruises, the differential diagnoses include the following: 
         
           Mongolian spots 
           Hemangiomas (overgrowth of capillaries) 
           Eczema 
           Phytophotodermatitis (cutaneous phototoxic cutaneous eruption) 
           Erythema multiforme (multishaped red lesions believed to be a sensitivity reaction) 
           Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) 
           Bleeding disorders (eg, hemophilia) 
           Malignancy 
           Ehlers-Danlos syndrome 
           Osteogenesis imperfecta 
           Folk-healing practices (eg, coining, cupping; see Burns, below) 
             Mongolian spots on a dark-skinned child.  Mongolian spots on a dark-skinned child.  
             Mongolian spots on a light-skinned child. Mongolian spots can have a greenish cast depending on... Mongolian spots on a light-skinned child. Mongolian spots can have a greenish cast depending on the skin color of the child.  Skeletal fractures For skeletal fractures, the differential diagnoses include normal variants of bone structure (may appear as suspicious findings on radiographs), congenital  syphilis 
         
           Type I is the most common form, has autosomal dominant inheritance, and is responsible for 80% of patients. Other major findings of type I OI include mildly to moderately severe bone fragility with occasional fractures at birth, easy bruising, short stature, and blue sclera. Type I OI may be associated with a family history of hearing impairment. Type I may easily be confused with maltreatment, especially if all of the injuries are skeletal in nature. A thorough medical history and family history are essential. 
           Type II is a perinatal lethal form. Death typically occurs by age 1 month, with multiple fractures at birth. This type of OI is generally readily distinguishable from child physical abuse. 
           Type III is rare and is easily distinguished from maltreatment because of severe bone fragility and osteopenia, triangular facies, ligamentous laxity, skeletal deformity, and abnormal appearance of teeth. 
           Type IV is the most difficult to distinguish from maltreatment because bones may appear normal when the first fracture develops but are usually characterized by mild-to-moderate bone fragility, osteopenia, wormian bones, birth fractures in approximately one third of cases, and normal sclerae. Genetic consultation is necessary to pursue a more detailed workup for OI and the characterization of the collagen disorder. The incidence of OI (all types) is estimated at 1 case in 20,000 live births; OI is much rarer than child abuse. Burns The differential diagnoses for lesions that appear as burns include, but is not limited to, hypersensitivity reaction with blistering, friction blisters, impetigo (may appear circular and be confused with cigarette burns), phytophotodermatitis (reddened areas and erosions that result from sun exposure of skin that has psoralen residue), dermatitis herpetiformis (immunobullous skin condition characterized by blisters that may erode), and folk-healing practices such as coining (rubbing of coin or spoon repetitively over the skin), cupping (application of heated cup over skin with resultant vacuum action as it cools), and moxibustion (application of heated incense to skin). The physician should look for a history supporting this diagnosis over a diagnosis of suspected physical abuse. CNS injuries The differential diagnoses for the altered mental status findings observed in CNS injuries include various serious disorders such as meningitis, neurologic conditions that have seizures as a component, and ingestions that may simulate the serious clinical features of CNS injury. A child with CNS injury often is seriously ill, presenting in a life-threatening condition with seizures and respiratory arrest. For serious life-threatening injury, no data support the existence of a lucid period between the time of injury and the onset of symptoms; rather, for acute subdural hematoma with severe neurologic sequela, clinical deterioration would be expected immediately around the time of injury. Traumatic acute subdural hematomas, especially those that lead to the death of child, do not occur in a subclinical or insidious manner in an otherwise healthy infant. Abusive head trauma (AHT) In considering the differential diagnoses for the findings in AHT, the differential diagnosis subdural hematoma and retinal hemorrhages needs to be considered. For subdural hematoma, the differential diagnoses include accidental trauma, coagulation disorders, vascular malformations, the rare amino acid inborn error of metabolism glutaric aciduria type I (associated with acute encephalopathy and chronic subdural hematoma), and the folk-healing practice  caida di mollera, Retinal hemorrhages For retinal hemorrhages, the differential diagnoses include vasculitis, vascular obstruction, and toxic febrile states associated with serious infection. Again, in working through a differential diagnoses, the workup should reveal history and physical examination findings supportive of such a diagnosis over physical abuse. 
     Workup 
       Laboratory Studies 
         History and the physical examination findings determine which laboratory and diagnostic imaging studies are necessary. [ If a bleeding problem is suspected, a basic bleeding evaluation (platelets, PT, aPTT) is a valuable screening tool, the results of which may suggest the need for more sophisticated bleeding evaluation and/or hematology consultation, if available. Pattern mark or highly suspicious bruising, in the absence of other bruising in more common locations (eg, shins of school-age child), likely does not require an extensive bleeding workup. If a genetic bone disease or mineralization defect is suspected, screening calcium, magnesium, phosphorus, and vitamin D levels is indicated. Interpretation of vitamin D levels in children is complex due to lack of robust evidence establishing normal values and thresholds below which bones would be clinically more susceptible to fracture. Review of radiographs with a pediatric radiologist is ideal to evaluate bones for signs of poor growth or healing. Genetic consultation, if available, may be warranted. Toxicology screening is indicated if the clinical situation suggests a possible ingestion as the cause of the findings on examination and evaluation or when a child presents from a household where drug use or production is suspected or confirmed. [ Screening for abdominal injury is recommended in children younger than age 5 years in whom abuse is suspected, even in the absence of clear external evidence of abdominal injury or symptoms such as pain or vomiting. Note the image below. 
           Faint abdominal bruising. This toddler had elevated liver function test results, liver... Faint abdominal bruising. This toddler had elevated liver function test results, liver laceration found on abdominal CT scan, and an upper lip frenulum tear. Note that abdominal injury may be present with little or no bruising of the abdomen.  Screening includes aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) as markers for liver injury, amylase and lipase levels for pancreatic injury, urine analysis for red blood cells to evaluate for urinary tract injury, and stool guaiac for intestinal injury. [ Basic guidelines for the appropriate evaluation of a child suspected to be a victim of physical abuse, by age, are shown below. 
           Guidelines for the assessment of suspected physical abuse.  Guidelines for the assessment of suspected physical abuse.  
       Imaging Studies 
         For children younger than 2 years suspected of having been physically abused, a skeletal survey is recommended to rule out skeletal injury, both new and old. A retrospective study on children assessed with skeletal surveys to evaluate for missed physical abuse and unsuspected fractures found that about 11% of the survey results were positive for a previously unsuspected fracture. The skeletal survey results directly influenced making the diagnosis of abuse in 50% of the children with positive skeletal survey results. Wider use of skeletal survey may be justified, especially for high-risk populations. [ In 2014, a multispecialty panel of experts released skeletal survey guidelines to help guide assessment of whether fractures in children under 2 years of age are due to abuse or accidents. [ 
           
             Skeletal survey should be performed in children with fractures resulting from abuse, domestic violence, or being hit by a toy or other object. 
             Skeletal survey should be performed in children with rib fractures and in those without a history of fracture from trauma, except in ambulatory children 12 months of age or older with a toddler fracture or buckle fracture of the radius/ulna or tibia/fibula. 
             If no abuse is suspected, skeletal survey should not be performed in cases of distal spiral fracture of the tibia/fibula in children 12-23 months old with a history of falling while running/walking, or in cases of distal radial/ulna buckle fracture in ambulatory children 12-23 months old with a history of falling onto an outstretched hand. 
             Skeletal survey should be performed in most children under 12 months of age. Depending on history and physical examination, other diagnostic and imaging tests may be indicated including the following: 
           
             Radionuclide bone scanning assists in identifying new rib fractures and subtle long bone fractures not apparent on the skeletal survey. 
             CT scanning of the head is indicated in any child suspected of inflicted head trauma in order to image the brain and assess for injury (see guidelines in image below) 
             MRI can be a valuable adjunct to head CT scanning because it can further define an injury and help identify different ages of blood contained in a subdural hematoma 
             CT scanning of the thorax and abdomen may be helpful to view the organs in the chest and abdomen if injury is suspected. CT scanning of the abdomen is recommended in suspected abuse victims who have abnormal values for AST, ALT, amylase, lipase, or urine red blood cells, as indicated in Lab Studies. Note the images below. 
               Guidelines for the assessment of suspected physical abuse.  Guidelines for the assessment of suspected physical abuse.  
               CT scan showing liver laceration. Child had severe abdominal bruising (see next image).... CT scan showing liver laceration. Child had severe abdominal bruising (see next image). Caregiver admitted to repeatedly punching the child in the abdomen.  
               Abdominal bruising in a toddler who also had a liver laceration (also see previous CT scan).  Abdominal bruising in a toddler who also had a liver laceration (also see previous CT scan).  
       Procedures 
         Photodocumentation of cutaneous injuries, such as burns, bite marks, bruising, or other injuries, is very helpful in cases of child abuse. Photodocumentation, when used as an adjunct to standard medical written documentation, allows consulting physicians, child protective services (CPS) workers, law enforcement personnel, attorneys, and others to view and better comprehend the injuries. Photographs of injuries are very helpful in legal proceedings for protecting the child and determining guilt. Photodocumentation should be performed in accordance with institutional policies and procedures and should be treated as protected health information under the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). 
     Treatment & Management 
       Medical Care 
         Treatment for physical abuse is a complex endeavor involving an interdisciplinary team approach. The nature of the injury determines the form of medical therapy, and the details of the caregiving environment determine the psychosocial supports needed to keep the child safe. For medical issues, skeletal fractures of the long bones may require casting, and orthopedics should be consulted for assistance with diagnosis and management. If clinical consideration is being given to the possibility of osteogenesis imperfecta (OI), a genetics consultation may also be valuable. Burns vary in severity and treatments range from cleansing the area to skin grafting. Plastic surgery should be consulted for assistance with management of more serious burns; transfer to a burn unit may be indicated. See  Initial Evaluation and Management of the Burn Patient The most severely injured children, such as those with CNS injury, may require resuscitation and will need intensive care. A multitude of specialists may need to be involved in order to correctly evaluate and treat these seriously ill children. Whenever abusive head trauma is suspected, ophthalmology should be consulted for a formal evaluation, including examination of the eyes for retinal hemorrhages. Psychosocial management that requires a significant amount of coordination among various services providers, including the physician and other healthcare providers, complements the medical management. Recommendations from the American Academy of Pediatrics state that pediatricians are mandated reporters of suspected abuse, and reports to child protective service agencies are required by law when the physician has a reasonable suspicion of abuse. Transferring a child’s care to another physician or hospital does not relieve the pediatrician of his or her reporting responsibilities. In addition, thorough documentation in medical records and effective communication with nonmedical investigators in child protection may improve outcomes of investigations and protect vulnerable children. [ The child protective services (CPS) agency in each community is responsible for performing investigations of cases in which physical abuse is suspected and relies on the physicians to provide the details of the medical evaluation. In addition, CPS assesses the caregivers' background, caregiving abilities and potential, environmental safety, risk for repeat abuse, and risk to other siblings. A variety of CPS service plan options are available, ranging from periodic contact with the child and family to removal of the child from the home, either temporarily or permanently, with termination of parental rights. The CPS process for child maltreatment cases typically involves the following steps: 
           
             Intake - Screening of reports and acceptance of case 
             Initial risk assessment - Caregiver interviews, medical information gathering, home evaluation, and possibility of contact with law enforcement 
             Case planning - Determination of safety for the child with essentially 3 options: (1) the child goes home with the caregiver with or without services depending on the circumstances, (2) the child is removed from home and family with caregivers' consent and offered services to assist them in working towards reunifying with the child, and (3) the child is removed from the home and family without caregivers' consent, involving court action and incorporation of legal steps and processes to determine the ultimate plan for the child. 
       Surgical Care 
         In cases of severe or multisystem trauma, involvement of a pediatric surgeon may be necessary for care and surgical treatment of injuries. 
       Consultations 
         The following consultations may be warranted: 
           
             Pediatric radiologist expertise is important because many abusive fractures in infants are subtle on radiographs. Routine pediatric radiologist involvement is ideal. In locations where pediatric radiologists are not routinely available, one should be consulted in cases in which dating of bone injuries become central to the maltreatment investigation and when concerns arise regarding osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) or other bone mineralization problems. 
             Orthopedists can assist with diagnosis and management in cases of skeletal fractures of the long bones. 
             Hematologists can assist with diagnosis and management of bleeding disorders. 
             Geneticists may be needed for a detailed workup for OI or other collagen disorders for characterization of the collagen disorder. 
             Plastic surgeons may be needed to assist with the management of serious burns. 
             Ophthalmologists should be involved whenever abusive head trauma (AHT) is suspected, for a formal evaluation including examination of the eyes for retinal hemorrhages via dilated direct ophthalmoscope examination, ideally with retinal photography to allow for independent peer review. 
             Child psychiatrist, behavioral-developmental pediatrician, or psychiatric social worker may be needed to assess the mental health needs of the child and family, as well as to coordinate an overall psychosocial treatment plan. 
     Follow-up 
       Patient Education 
         For patient education resources, see the  Children's Health Center Child Abuse Bruises 
     start media 
       
         Overlap of child maltreatment and domestic violence.  Overlap of child maltreatment and domestic violence.  
       
         Handprint on face. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  Handprint on face. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  
       
         Handprint on leg. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  Handprint on leg. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  
       
         Bruises inflicted with belt. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  Bruises inflicted with belt. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  
       
         Bruises inflicted with switch. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  Bruises inflicted with switch. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  
       
         Bruises inflicted with switch. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  Bruises inflicted with switch. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  
       
         Switch. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  Switch. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  
       
         Bruises inflicted with wooden spoon. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  Bruises inflicted with wooden spoon. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  
       
         Bruises inflicted with belt. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  Bruises inflicted with belt. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  
       
         Buckle fracture of distal femur shaft. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  Buckle fracture of distal femur shaft. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  
       
         Duodenal hematoma. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  Duodenal hematoma. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  
       
         Burn from car seat. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  Burn from car seat. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  
       
         Car seat. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  Car seat. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  
       
         Model for femoral neck fracture from being yanked from crib. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci... Model for femoral neck fracture from being yanked from crib. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  
       
         Femoral neck fracture from being yanked from crib in previous image. Image courtesy of Lawrence... Femoral neck fracture from being yanked from crib in previous image. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  
       
         Inflicted pinch mark shaft. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  Inflicted pinch mark shaft. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  
       
         Burn from being held down on hot cement. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  Burn from being held down on hot cement. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  
       
         Old and new radius fracture. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  Old and new radius fracture. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  
       
         Child with slap mark. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  Child with slap mark. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  
       
         Radiograph of old radius and ulna fracture in child with slap mark. Image courtesy of Lawrence R... Radiograph of old radius and ulna fracture in child with slap mark. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  
       
         Radiograph of multiple rib fractures. Radiographs also revealed old radius and ulna fracture.... Radiograph of multiple rib fractures. Radiographs also revealed old radius and ulna fracture. The child presented with a slap mark. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  
       
         Sunburn. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  Sunburn. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  
       
         Burn inflicted with lighter. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  Burn inflicted with lighter. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  
       
         Acute subdural with shift. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  Acute subdural with shift. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  
       
         Fingernail scratch in child with acute subdural with shift. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci... Fingernail scratch in child with acute subdural with shift. Image courtesy of Lawrence R. Ricci, MD.  
       
         Ecological model for understanding violence.  Ecological model for understanding violence.  
       
         US maltreatment trends, 1990-2010.  US maltreatment trends, 1990-2010.  
       
         Adverse child experiences pyramid.  Adverse child experiences pyramid.  
       
         National Pediatric Trauma Group registry findings.  National Pediatric Trauma Group registry findings.  
       
         Buckle fracture of distal femur without healing (acute).  Buckle fracture of distal femur without healing (acute).  
       
         Distal femur buckle fracture, 2-week follow-up film with sclerotic fracture line and periosteal... Distal femur buckle fracture, 2-week follow-up film with sclerotic fracture line and periosteal new bone healing.  
       
         Guidelines for the assessment of suspected physical abuse.  Guidelines for the assessment of suspected physical abuse.  
       
         Linear inflicted bruising extending from arm to back, inflicted by a belt. Same child shown... Linear inflicted bruising extending from arm to back, inflicted by a belt. Same child shown again with back bruising.  
       
         Overlying linear inflicted marks, which the child disclosed came from a belt. Same child is... Overlying linear inflicted marks, which the child disclosed came from a belt. Same child is shown in image of arm and back.  
       
         CT scan showing liver laceration. Child had severe abdominal bruising (see next image).... CT scan showing liver laceration. Child had severe abdominal bruising (see next image). Caregiver admitted to repeatedly punching the child in the abdomen.  
       
         Abdominal bruising in a toddler who also had a liver laceration (also see previous CT scan).  Abdominal bruising in a toddler who also had a liver laceration (also see previous CT scan).  
       
         Example of ear bruising. Ear bruising is a rare accidental injury. This 10-month-old child was... Example of ear bruising. Ear bruising is a rare accidental injury. This 10-month-old child was intubated for abusive head trauma (AHT) and spiral femur fracture and had this ear bruising in addition to other facial bruising.  
       
         Mongolian spots on a dark-skinned child.  Mongolian spots on a dark-skinned child.  
       
         Mongolian spots on a light-skinned child. Mongolian spots can have a greenish cast depending on... Mongolian spots on a light-skinned child. Mongolian spots can have a greenish cast depending on the skin color of the child.  
       
         Faint abdominal bruising. This toddler had elevated liver function test results, liver... Faint abdominal bruising. This toddler had elevated liver function test results, liver laceration found on abdominal CT scan, and an upper lip frenulum tear. Note that abdominal injury may be present with little or no bruising of the abdomen.  
       
         Pattern bruising and extensive back bruising. The 4-year-old child was found dead in his home... Pattern bruising and extensive back bruising. The 4-year-old child was found dead in his home and had no reported history. Autopsy revealed duodenal hematoma and perforation as cause of death.  
       
         Pattern contact burn on buttocks of diapered child. The burn likely came from the metal grate... Pattern contact burn on buttocks of diapered child. The burn likely came from the metal grate surrounding heater.  
       
         Series of 3 photos of likely accidental hot water scald burn on the leg of an infant. Sparing of... Series of 3 photos of likely accidental hot water scald burn on the leg of an infant. Sparing of skin-to-skin contact areas indicates child was flexed at the knee and ankle at the time of injury, which was consistent with being seated in the kitchen sink. Burn injuries require detailed scene investigation. In this case, investigators confirmed the ease of turning on the faucet and the high temperature of the water from it.  
       
         Example of strangulation/ligature marks on the neck of a toddler. Strangulation/ligature marks... Example of strangulation/ligature marks on the neck of a toddler. Strangulation/ligature marks are often linear petechiae and may have fingernail scratches from the victim from struggling to free the airway.  
     
       Author 
         Angelo P Giardino, MD, PhD, MPH Associate Professor, Baylor College of Medicine; Chief Medical Officer, Texas Children’s Health Plan; Chief Quality Officer, Medicine, Texas Children’s Hospital Angelo P Giardino, MD, PhD, MPH is a member of the following medical societies:  American Professional Society on the Abuse of Children Harris County Medical Society International Society for the Prevention of Child Abuse and Neglect Ray E Helfer Society Academic Pediatric Association American Academy of Pediatrics Disclosure: Received grant/research funds from Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) Integrated Community Systems for CSHCN Grant for other; Received advisory board from Baxter Healthcare Corporation for board membership. 
       Coauthor(s) 
         Eileen R Giardino, RN, MSN, PhD FNP-BC, ANP-BC, Associate Professor of Nursing, Department of Family Nursing, University of Texas Health Sciences Center Houston, School of Nursing Eileen R Giardino, RN, MSN, PhD is a member of the following medical societies:  American College Health Association American Professional Society on the Abuse of Children American Association of Nurse Practitioners American Nurses Association International Society for the Prevention of Child Abuse and Neglect Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
         Rebecca L Moles, MD Assistant Professor, Department of Pediatrics, Section of General Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine; Child Abuse Pediatrician, Associate Medical Director, Yale Child Abuse Programs, Department of Pediatrics, Yale-New Haven Hospital Rebecca L Moles, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American Academy of Pediatrics American College of Physicians American Professional Society on the Abuse of Children The Ray Helfer Society Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Pharmacy Editor 
         Mary L Windle, PharmD Adjunct Associate Professor, University of Nebraska Medical Center College of Pharmacy; Editor-in-Chief, Medscape Drug Reference Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Chief Editor 
         Caroly Pataki, MD Health Sciences Clinical Professor of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, University of California, Los Angeles, David Geffen School of Medicine Caroly Pataki, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry New York Academy of Sciences Physicians for Social Responsibility Disclosure: Received consulting fee from Otsuka Pharmaceutical for board membership. 
       Additional Contributors 
         Chet Johnson, MD Professor of Pediatrics, Associate Director and Developmental-Behavioral Pediatrician, KU Center for Child Health and Development, Shiefelbusch Institute for Life Span Studies; Assistant Dean, Faculty Affairs and Development, University of Kansas School of Medicine Chet Johnson, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American Academy of Pediatrics Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
     Acknowledgements 
       The authors gratefully acknowledge the assistance of Dr. Lawrence R. Ricci in providing photographs to illustrate the various injuries that may be seen when evaluating children for suspected physical abuse. Despite being a busy clinician, educator and academic leader, Dr. Ricci made time to select cases for this article from his large archive.  
     
       [Guideline] Kellogg ND,. Evaluation of suspected child physical abuse.  Pediatrics [Medline] 
       Farst K, Reading Meyer JA, Mac Bird T, James L, Robbins JM. Hair drug testing of children suspected of exposure to the manufacture of methamphetamine.  J Forensic Leg Med [Medline] 
       Lane WG, Dubowitz H, Langenberg P. Screening for occult abdominal trauma in children with suspected physical abuse.  Pediatrics [Medline] 
       Lindberg D, Makoroff K, Harper N, Laskey A, Bechtel K, Deye K. Utility of hepatic transaminases to recognize abuse in children.  Pediatrics [Medline] 
       Sedlak,  A.J.,  Mettenburg,  J.,  Basena,  M., et al. Fourth National Incidence Study of Child Abuse and Neglect (NIS–4): Report to Congress, Executive Summary. 2010.  
       Sedlak AJ, Mettenburg J, Basena M, et al. Fourth National Incidence Study of Child Abuse and Neglect.  US Dept of Health and Human Services [Full Text] 
       National Center on Child Abuse and Neglect. National Child Abuse and Neglect Data System: 1991 Summary Data Component. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office. 1993. Working Paper 2.  
       Helfer RE. The developmental basis of child abuse and neglect: An epidemiological approach.  The Battered Child 
       Straus MA, Kantor GK. Corporal punishment of adolescents by parents: a risk factor in the epidemiology of depression, suicide, alcohol abuse, child abuse, and wife beating.  Adolescence [Medline] 
       American Academy of Pediatrics Web site. Periodic Survey of Fellows #38: Attitudes and Counseling on Corporal Punishment in the Home: July 1998.  Available at: www.aap.org/research/ps38exs1.htm 
       Halliday KE, Broderick NJ, Somers JM, Hawkes R. Dating fractures in infants.  Clin Radiol [Medline] 
       Pilling ML, Vanezis P, Perrett D, Johnston A. Visual assessment of the timing of bruising by forensic experts.  J Forensic Leg Med [Medline] 
       Christian CW, Block R. Abusive head trauma in infants and children.  Pediatrics [Medline] 
       US Department of Health & Human Services. Administration for Children and Families, Youth and Families Children’s Bureau. Child Maltreatment 2010. US Department of Health & Human Services. Available at  http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/cb/pubs/cm10/cm10.pdf 
       Finkelhor D, Jones L, Shattuck A. Updated Trends in Child Maltreatment 2010. http://www.unh.edu/ccrc/pdf/CV203_Updated%20trends%202010%20FINAL_12-19-11.pdf. Available at  http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/sites/cyber.law.harvard.edu/files/Trends%20in%20Child%20Maltreatment.pdf 
       Prevent Child Abuse America. 2006 National Child Maltreatment Statistics National Center on Child Abuse Prevention Research. US Department of Health and Human Services, Administration on Children, Youth ad Families. Available at  http://member.preventchildabuse.org/site/DocServer/Child_Maltreatment_Fact_Sheet_2005.pdf?docID=221 
       DiScala C, Sege R, Li G, Reece RM. Child  Abuse and Unintentional Injuries.  Pediatr Adolesc Med 
       Felitti VJ, Anda RF, Nordenberg D, Williamson DF, Spitz AM, Edwards V. Relationship of childhood abuse and household dysfunction to many of the leading causes of death in adults. The Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACE) Study.  Am J Prev Med [Medline] 
       Bentley T, Widom CS. A 30-year follow-up of the effects of child abuse and neglect on obesity in adulthood.  Obesity (Silver Spring) [Medline] 
       Fox S. Sentinel Injuries May Precede Severe Abuse in Infants. Medscape Medical News. March 11, 2013. Available at  http://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/780552 
       Sheets LK, Leach ME, Koszewski IJ, Lessmeier AM, Nugent M, Simpson P. Sentinel Injuries in Infants Evaluated for Child Physical Abuse.  Pediatrics [Medline] 
       Hand L. Skeletal Survey Guidelines for Toddler Fractures Issued. Medscape Medical News. Available at  http://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/826776 
       Wood JN, Fakeye O, Feudtner C, Mondestin V, Localio R, Rubin DM. Development of Guidelines for Skeletal Survey in Young Children With Fractures.  Pediatrics [Medline] 
       Christian CW. The evaluation of suspected child physical abuse.  Pediatrics [Medline] 
       Brown T. AAP updates guideline on child physical abuse. Medscape Medical News. Available at  http://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/843827 
       Duffy SO, Squires J, Fromkin JB, Berger RP. Use of skeletal surveys to evaluate for physical abuse: analysis of 703 consecutive skeletal surveys.  Pediatrics [Medline] 
       [Guideline] Policy statement--Child abuse, confidentiality, and the health insurance portability and accountability act.  Pediatrics [Medline] 
       [Guideline] Policy statement--Expert witness participation in civil and criminal proceedings.  Pediatrics [Medline] 
       The Child in Court: A Subject Review.  Pediatrics 
       Administration for Children and Families.  US Department of Health and Human Services NIS-4 Description [Full Text] 
       Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACE) Study. Center for Disease Control. Available at  http://www.cdc.gov/NCCDPHP/ACE/PYRAMID.HTM 
       American Humane Association. AHA fact sheet #12: The use of physical discipline. Englewood, CO. 1994.  
       Bays J. Reece RM, Ludwig S, eds.  Child Abuse: Medical Diagnosis and Management 
       Bays J, Jenny C. Genital and anal conditions confused with child sexual abuse trauma.  Am J Dis Child [Medline] 
       Belsky J. Child maltreatment: an ecological integration.  Am Psychol [Medline] 
       Berkowitz CD. Pediatric abuse. New patterns of injury.  Emerg Med Clin North Am [Medline] 
       Bronfenbrenner U. Toward an experimental ecology of human development.  Am Psychol 
       Brooks M. Physical abuse in childhood linked to ADHD in adults.  Medscape Medical News [Full Text] 
       Child Maltreatment 2003. US Department of Health and Human Services. Available at  http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/cb/pubs/cm03/cm2003.pdf 
       Giardino, AP,  Alexander R, eds.  Child Maltreatment: A Clinical Guide and Reference 
       Clark KD, Tepper D, Jenny C. Effect of a screening profile on the diagnosis of nonaccidental burns  in children.  Pediatr Emerg Care [Medline] 
       Coant PN, Kornberg AE, Brody AS, Edwards-Holmes K. Markers for occult liver injury in cases of physical abuse in children.  Pediatrics [Medline] 
       Dubowitz H. Prevention.  Child Maltreatment: A Clinical Guide & Reference 
       Duhaime AC, Christian CW, Rorke LB, Zimmerman RA. Nonaccidental head injury in infants--the "shaken-baby syndrome".  N Engl J Med [Medline] 
       Feldman KW. Evaluation of Physical Abuse. Helfer ME, Kempe RS, Krugman RD, eds.  The Battered Child 
       Fuller-Thomson E, Mehta R, Valeo A. Establishing a link between attention deficit disorder/attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and childhood physical abuse.  Journal of Aggression, Maltreatment & Trauma [Full Text] 
       Garbarino J. The human ecology of child maltreatment: A conceptual model for research.  Journal of Marriage and the Family 
       Garbarino J, Brookhouser PE, Authier KJ.  Special Children Special Risks: The Maltreatment of Children with Disabilities 
       Garbarino J, Eckenrode J.  Understanding Abusive Families: An Ecological Approach to Theory and Practice 
       Giardino AP, Alexander R.  Child Maltreatment: A Clinical Guide and Reference 
       Giardino AP, Christian CW, Giardino ER.  A Practical Guide to the Evaluation of Child Physical Abuse and Neglect 
       Giardino AP, Giardino ER.  Recognition of Child Abuse for the Mandated Reporter 
       Graham-Bermann SA, Edleson JL.  Domestic Violence in the Lives of Children: The Future of Research, Intervention 
       Grossman DC, Rauh MJ, Rivara FP. Prevalence of corporal punishment among students in Washington State  schools.  Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med [Medline] 
       Gushurst CA. Child abuse: behavioral aspects and other associated problems.  Pediatr Clin North Am [Medline] 
       Hansbrough JF, Hansbrough W. Pediatric burns.  Pediatr Rev [Medline] 
       Harding B, Ridson RA, Krous HF. Shaken Baby Syndrome.  BMJ 
       Helfer RE. The etiology of child abuse.  Pediatrics [Medline] 
       Hyman IA.  The Case Against Spanking: How to Discipline Your Child Without Hitting 
       In Harm’s Way: Domestic Violence and Child Maltreatment.  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Children’s Bureau, Administration on Children, Youth Families.  Administration for Children and Families. National Clearing House on Child Abuse and Neglect Information http://www.calib.com/dvcps/facts/harmway.doc 
       Jenny C. Cutaneous manifestations of abuse.  Child Abuse: Medical Diagnosis and Management 
       Johnson CF. Inflicted injury versus accidental injury.  Pediatr Clin North Am [Medline] 
       Knapp JF, Dowd MD. Family violence: implications for the pediatrician.  Pediatr Rev [Medline] 
       Lazoritz S, Baldwin S, Kini N. The Whiplash Shaken Infant Syndrome: has Caffey's syndrome changed or have we changed his syndrome?.  Child Abuse Negl [Medline] 
       Levin AV. Ocular manifestations of child abuse.  Child Abuse: Medical Diagnosis and Management 
       Ludwig S. Child abuse.  Textbook of Pediatric Emergency Medicine 
       McCormick KF. Attitudes of primary care physicians toward corporal punishment.  JAMA [Medline] 
       Myers JEB. Expert testimony.  The APSAC Handbook on Child Maltreatment 
       Reece RM, Nicholson CE.  Inflicted Childhood Neurotrauma 
       Reece RM, Sege R. Childhood head injuries: accidental or inflicted?.  Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med [Medline] 
       Robson MC, Heggers JP. Pathophysiology of the burn wound. Carvajal HF, Parks DH, eds.  Burns in Children: Pediatric Burn Management 
       Schene PA. Past, present, and future roles of child protective services.  Future Child [Medline] 
       Schwartz AJ, Ricci LR. How accurately can bruises be aged in abused children? Literature  review and synthesis.  Pediatrics [Medline] 
       Sirotnak AP, Krugman RD. Physical abuse of children: an update.  Pediatr Rev [Medline] 
       Spivak BS. Biomechanics of nonaccidental trauma. Ludwig S, Kornberg AE, eds.  Child Abuse: A Medical Reference 
       Stein MT, Perrin EL. Guidance for effective discipline. American Academy of Pediatrics.  Committee on Psychosocial Aspects of Child and Family Health.  Pediatrics [Medline] 
       Straus MA. Is violence toward children increasing? A comparison of 1975 and 1985 national survey rates.  Family Violence 
       Torrey SB, Ludwig S. The emergency physician in the courtroom: serving as an expert witness  in cases of child abuse.  Pediatr Emerg Care [Medline] 
       Weston WL, Lane AT, Morelli JG.  Color Textbook of Pediatric Dermatology 
       Wolraich ML, Aceves J, Feldman HM, et al. American Academy of Pediatrics. Committee on Psychosocial Aspects of  Child and Family Health. The child in court: a subject review.  Pediatrics [Medline] 
       World Report on Violence and Health. World Health Organization. Available at  http://www.who.int/violence_injury_prevention/violence/world_report/en/full_en.pdf

Article 30:

   
     Gaucher Disease 
       Gaucher Disease: Practice Essentials, Background, Pathophysiology Gaucher Disease Clinical Presentation: History, Physical, Causes Gaucher Disease Differential Diagnoses Gaucher Disease Workup: Laboratory Studies, Imaging Studies, Other Tests Gaucher Disease Treatment & Management: Medical Care, Surgical Care, Consultations Gaucher Disease Medication: Enzyme replacement therapy, Glucosylceramide Synthase Inhibitors Gaucher Disease Follow-up: Further Outpatient Care, Further Inpatient Care, Deterrence/Prevention 
       Gaucher Disease: Practice Essentials, Background, Pathophysiology Gaucher Disease Clinical Presentation: History, Physical, Causes Gaucher Disease Differential Diagnoses Gaucher Disease Workup: Laboratory Studies, Imaging Studies, Other Tests Gaucher Disease Treatment & Management: Medical Care, Surgical Care, Consultations Gaucher Disease Medication: Enzyme replacement therapy, Glucosylceramide Synthase Inhibitors Gaucher Disease Follow-up: Further Outpatient Care, Further Inpatient Care, Deterrence/Prevention 
       Overview
 Practice Essentials Background Pathophysiology Epidemiology Presentation
 History Physical Causes Differential Diagnoses
 Workup
 Laboratory Studies Imaging Studies Other Tests Procedures Histologic Findings Treatment
 Medical Care Surgical Care Consultations Diet Activity Medication
 Follow-up
 Further Outpatient Care Further Inpatient Care Deterrence/Prevention Complications Prognosis Patient Education 
       Gaucher Disease Overview Gaucher Disease Clinical Presentation Gaucher Disease Differential Diagnoses Gaucher Disease Workup Gaucher Disease Treatment Gaucher Disease Medication Gaucher Disease Follow-up 944157-overview Nov 24, 2014 2015-07-09-17:48 0 Pediatrics: Genetics and Metabolic Disease 2002 Diseases & Conditions Condition 
       1 2 content 944157 502 5003061 9 age1 
     Jun 05, 2015 
       condition Diseases & Conditions 
       pediatrics_genetics Pediatrics: Genetics and Metabolic Disease 
       pediatrics_genetics_metabolic Metabolic Disease Gaucher disease, Gaucher’s disease, glucocerebrosidase deficiency, cerebroside lipidosis, acid beta-glucosidase deficiency, splenomegaly, anemia, lipid storage disease, lysosomal storage disease, glucocerebrosidase, pancytopenia, massive hepatosplenomegaly, treatment, symptoms, glucocerebrosidase 1, parkinsonism Gaucher disease is a lipid storage disease characterized by the deposition of glucocerebroside in cells of the macrophage-monocyte system. The disorder results from the deficiency of a specific lysosomal hydrolase, glucocerebrosidase (also termed acid beta-glucosidase, glucosylceramidase). 1 Gaucher Disease 
     Overview 
       Practice Essentials 
         Gaucher disease is a rare genetic disorder characterized by the deposition of glucocerebroside in cells of the macrophage-monocyte system. The disorder results from the deficiency of the enzyme glucocerebrosidase. 
         Essential update: New drug eliglustat proving to work for Gaucher disease The oral glucosylceramide (glucocerebroside) synthase inhibitor eliglustat, approved by the FDA for treatment of Gaucher disease type 1 (GD1) in August 2014, has proven as effective as intravenous enzyme replacement therapy with imiglucerase. [ In a study of 159 patients with Gaucher’s disease, researchers found that fewer patients treated with eliglustat (85%) than imiglucerase (94%) met criteria for hemoglobin level, platelet count, spleen volume, and liver volume indicating stable disease for 12 months. Adverse events were more common with eliglustat, but most were mild.  In three other studies, eliglustat was superior to placebo over nine months of treatment, outcomes were similar for patients treated with eliglustat or imiglucerase for 4 years, and outcomes of eliglustat treatment were similar when dosing regimens were determined based on CYP2D6-genotype-predicted phenotype or plasma eliglustat concentrations. 
         Signs and symptoms Gaucher disease has traditionally been divided into the following three clinical subtypes, delineated by the absence or presence of neurologic involvement and its progression: 
           
             Type 1 - Nonneuronopathic form 
             Type 2 - Acute neuronopathic form 
             Type 3 - Chronic neuronopathic form Patients with type 1 disease commonly present with painless splenomegaly, anemia, or thrombocytopenia. They may also have chronic fatigue, hepatomegaly (with or without abnormal liver function test findings), bone pain, or pathologic fractures and may bruise easily because of thrombocytopenia. Bleeding secondary to thrombocytopenia may manifest as nosebleeds, bruising, or both. Patients with type 2 disease may present at birth or during infancy with increased tone, seizures, strabismus, and organomegaly. Failure to thrive, swallowing abnormalities, oculomotor apraxia, hepatosplenomegaly, and stridor due to laryngospasm are typical in infants with type 2 disease. In addition to organomegaly and bony involvement, individuals with type 3 disease have neurologic involvement. See  Clinical Presentation 
         Diagnosis Diagnosis can be confirmed through measurement of glucocerebrosidase activity in peripheral blood leukocytes. A finding of less than 15% of mean normal activity is diagnostic. Minor elevations of liver and angiotensin-converting enzyme levels are common.  See  Workup 
         Management Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) is indicated for patients with type 1 Gaucher disease who exhibit clinical signs and symptoms of the disease, including anemia, thrombocytopenia, skeletal disease, or visceromegaly. An oral glucosylceramide inhibitor is an alternate efficacious therapy. See  Treatment Medication 
       Background 
         Gaucher disease is a  lipid storage disease Gaucher disease has traditionally been divided into the following 3 clinical subtypes, delineated by the absence or presence of neurologic involvement and its progression:  
           
             Type 1 - Nonneuronopathic form 
             Type 2 - Acute neuronopathic form 
             Type 3 - Chronic neuronopathic form However, some cases do not fit precisely into one of these categories. All forms of Gaucher disease are autosomal recessively inherited.  
           Autosomal recessive inheritance pattern.  Autosomal recessive inheritance pattern.  Type 1 Gaucher disease is more common among individuals of Ashkenazi Jewish descent, although all 3 types are panethnic in their distribution.  
       Pathophysiology 
         Glucosylceramide, the accumulated glycolipid, is primarily derived from the phagocytosis and degradation of senescent leukocytes and, to a lesser extent, from erythrocyte membranes. The glycolipid storage gives rise to the characteristic Gaucher cells, macrophages engorged with lipid with a crumpled–tissue-paper appearance and displaced nuclei. The factors that contribute to neurologic involvement in patients with types 2 and 3 disease are still unknown but may be related to the accumulation of a cytotoxic glycolipid, glucosylsphingosine, in the brain due to the severe deficiency of glucocerebrosidase activity or to neuroinflammation. [ Glucosylceramide accumulation in the bone marrow, liver, spleen, lungs, and other organs contributes to pancytopenia, massive hepatosplenomegaly, and, at times, diffuse infiltrative pulmonary disease. Progressive infiltration of Gaucher cells in the bone marrow may lead to thinning of the cortex, pathologic fractures, bone pain, bony infarcts, and osteopenia. These bony features may also be related to macrophage-produced cytokines.  Disruption of the ceramide-to-glucosylceramide ratio can affect barrier formation in the epidermal layer of the skin, leading to ichthyosis or a collodion skin presentation in individuals who are severely affected (those with type 2).  
       Epidemiology 
         Frequency 
           United States Type 1 Gaucher disease more common among Jewish people of Eastern European origin; the carrier frequency in these individuals is approximately 1 per 15 population, whereas the disease frequency is 1 per 855 population. Gaucher disease is rare in the non-Jewish population, with an estimated frequency of 1 per 40,000 population.  
           International International disease frequency is similar to that in the United States, except for areas of the world with large Ashkenazi Jewish populations. Most patients worldwide are non-Jewish. As many as 60% of patients of Ashkenazi origin are estimated to be homozygous for the mild N370S mutation, which accounts for 75% of disease alleles in this population. Many individuals with this genotype never seek medical attention, contributing to an underestimation of the disease frequency. Type 3 disease is more common in the Norrbottnian region of Sweden (1 per 50,000 population), which has been traced to a common founder in the 17th century.  
         Mortality/Morbidity Mortality and morbidity varies with the different types. [ Type 1 Gaucher disease often presents in childhood with hepatosplenomegaly, pancytopenia, and skeletal disease, although striking clinical variability occurs in disease severity.  Type 2 Gaucher disease causes rapidly progressive neurovisceral storage disease and death during infancy or during the first years of life. A subset of this type, associated with congenital ichthyosis and  hydrops fetalis Type 3 Gaucher disease is often a less rapidly progressive neurovisceral storage disease. Various associated clinical courses have been reported, some of which cause death in childhood or early adulthood.  
         Race All forms of Gaucher disease are panethnic. Type 1 Gaucher disease is the most common lysosomal storage disease and is the most prevalent genetic disorder in individuals of Ashkenazi Jewish descent. Type 3 disease is more common in the Norrbottnian region of Sweden.  
         Sex All 3 types of Gaucher disease are inherited as autosomal recessive traits and have an equal sex distribution. 
         Age Patients with type 1 Gaucher disease may present in childhood with hepatosplenomegaly, pancytopenia, and crippling skeletal disease. Some patients are not diagnosed until adulthood, when they present with low blood counts or bone involvement, whereas others are diagnosed in the seventh to ninth decades of life after an incidental finding of thrombocytopenia or splenomegaly. Many affected individuals never develop signs or symptoms and do not seek medical attention. Types 2 and 3 Gaucher disease typically present in early childhood. Some subjects with parkinsonism have been found to have Gaucher disease at a later age.  
     Clinical Presentation 
       History 
         Because Gaucher disease is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait, the proband is commonly the first affected individual in the family.  
         Type 1 Gaucher disease At onset, patients with type 1 Gaucher disease commonly present with painless splenomegaly, anemia, or thrombocytopenia. They may also have chronic fatigue, hepatomegaly (with or without abnormal liver function test findings), bone pain, or pathologic fractures and may bruise easily because of thrombocytopenia. Bleeding secondary to thrombocytopenia may manifest as nosebleeds, bruising, or both. In symptomatic patients, splenomegaly is progressive and can become massive. Children with massive splenomegaly may be short in stature because of the energy expenditure required by the enlarged organ. Most patients with type 1 Gaucher disease have radiologic evidence of skeletal involvement, including an Erlenmeyer flask deformity of the distal femur, which is an early skeletal change. Clinically apparent bony involvement, which occurs in more than 20% of patients with Gaucher disease, can present as bone pain or pathologic fractures. In patients with symptomatic bone disease, lytic lesions can develop in the long bones, ribs, and pelvis, and osteosclerosis or osteopenia may be evident at an early age. Bone crises with severe pain and swelling can occur in individuals with type 1 Gaucher disease and are frequently mistaken for synovitis or osteomyelitis until other symptoms become apparent. Occasional patients with type 1 Gaucher disease develop pulmonary involvement, parkinsonism, multiple myeloma, or portal hypertension.  Patients with milder presentations of Gaucher disease are diagnosed later in life during evaluations for hematologic or skeletal problems or are found to have splenomegaly during routine examinations. Some patients are overtly asymptomatic, and a diagnosis is made incidentally after evaluation for other medical problems.  
         Type 2 Gaucher disease Type 2 disease is rare and is characterized by a rapid neurodegenerative course with extensive visceral involvement and death within the first 2 years of life. Patients with this type may present at birth or during infancy with increased tone, seizures, strabismus, and organomegaly. Disruption of the epidermal layers of the skin, observed on skin biopsy findings, may manifest before the onset of neurological symptoms, but this may not always be clinically apparent. Failure to thrive, swallowing abnormalities, oculomotor apraxia, hepatosplenomegaly, and stridor due to laryngospasm are typical in infants with type 2 disease. The progressive psychomotor degeneration and brain stem involvement leads to death, usually caused by aspiration and respiratory compromise.  A severe neonatal form can present in utero or perinatally with hydrops fetalis, congenital ichthyosis, or both. 
         Type 3 Gaucher disease This form of Gaucher disease widely varies and can present in infancy or childhood. In addition to organomegaly and bony involvement, individuals with type 3 disease have neurologic involvement. The slowing of the horizontal saccades, an oculomotor finding, is often the sole neurologic manifestation. Some patients develop myoclonic epilepsy, exhibit learning disabilities, or develop dementia. One rare subgroup of patients with type 3 Gaucher disease present with oculomotor findings, calcifications of the mitral and aortic valves, and corneal opacities. The phenotype is associated with homozygosity for the D409H mutant allele. Another rare subgroup of patients with type 3 Gaucher disease is a genetic isolate from the Norrbottnian region of Sweden, homozygous for the L444P mutation. These individuals present in early childhood with visceral and skeletal involvement and oculomotor abnormalities and may develop seizures, cognitive disabilities, and dementia.  Some specific learning disabilities are common in children with type 3 Gaucher disease. 
         Type 2-3 intermediate Gaucher disease Some patients present with severe neurovisceral manifestations in infancy or early childhood but survive past the second year of life, with death occurring in mid childhood (age 3-7 y). These patients are considered to fall within the phenotypic continuum between types 2 and 3.  
       Physical 
         Physical examination findings in type 1 disease usually include hepatosplenomegaly. Splenomegaly may be dramatic, with the splenic tip extending to the pelvis. Bruising along the anterior aspect of the shins and petechiae may be evident in patients with thrombocytopenia. Short stature and wasting are occasionally found in patients with massive organomegaly. In addition to these findings, patients with types 2 and 3 disease may have developmental delay, oculomotor abnormalities, and abnormal neurologic examinations. 
         Splenomegaly Patients present with highly variable degrees of splenomegaly, with a size increase that ranges from 5-fold to more than 80-fold when adjusted for body weight (average spleen is approximately 0.2% of body weight). The absolute size of the spleen has been known to vary between 300 g to more than 10 kg, accounting for up to 25% of body weight. Enlargement of the spleen appears to be most rapid in children with Gaucher disease. Rapid enlargement of the spleen in an adult with the disease should prompt suspicion of an associated disorder that may increase glycolipid turnover, such as hematologic malignancy, immune thrombocytopenia, or autoimmune hemolytic anemia.  Nodules on the surface of the spleen may represent regions of extramedullary hematopoiesis, collections of Gaucher cells, or resolving infarcts. Evidence of old infarcts is common in spleens that are enlarged more than 20-fold. Most splenic infarcts are asymptomatic, but subcapsular infarcts can present as localized abdominal pain. Intracapsular bleeding may also occur.  
         Hepatomegaly  Hepatomegaly occurs in more than 50% of patients with type 1 Gaucher disease. In a series of 88 patients, liver volumes ranged from within the reference range to 8.7-fold more than the predicted normal weight (normal is 2.5% of body weight), with a median of 1.75%. Hepatic glucocerebroside levels are elevated from 23-fold to 389-fold above the reference range. The massively enlarged liver is usually firm to palpation, with an irregular surface. Cirrhosis and portal hypertension are uncommon but occur in a small number of patients with Gaucher disease. Compression of the sinusoids by Gaucher cells can accentuate portal hypertension. Death from variceal bleeding has been reported, especially prior to enzyme replacement therapy. Minor elevations of liver enzyme levels are common, even in patients who are mildly affected, but the presence of jaundice or impaired hepatocellular synthetic function is a poor prognostic indicator. Jaundice in a patient with Gaucher disease is usually a result of infection, the development of chronic hepatitis, or, rarely, hepatic decompensation in the late stages. The presence of unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia is more suggestive of hemolysis.  Elevated levels of serum ferritin are occasionally found in individuals with Gaucher disease; however, transferrin saturation is usually normal. Glycolipid-laden Gaucher cells are evident in the sinusoids on liver biopsy findings, but the hepatocytes do not manifest overt glycolipid storage, presumably because of biliary excretion of glucocerebroside and the fact that exogenous glycolipid turnover is handled by the mononuclear phagocytes. Sparing of hepatocytes is consistent with the low incidence of liver failure in individuals with Gaucher disease.  
         Skeletal manifestations Skeletal manifestations of Gaucher disease vary, ranging from asymptomatic Erlenmeyer flask deformity of the distal femora to pathologic fractures, vertebral collapse, and acute bone crises that can be confused with acute osteomyelitis. Painful bone crises result from episodes of bone infarction, leading to osteosclerosis analogous to that occurring in sickle cell disease.  In children with Gaucher disease, acute hip lesions can be misinterpreted as Legg-Calvé-Perthes disease, and avascular necrosis of the hips is a common complication in individuals of all ages.  
         Hematologic complications Hematologic manifestations of Gaucher disease include cytopenia and acquired coagulopathy due to factor XI deficiency. However, genetic factor XI deficiency is common in individuals of Ashkenazi descent and may be present in some patients with Gaucher disease. Cytopenia that develops in patients who have undergone splenectomy reflects advanced marrow infiltration by Gaucher cells. Bone marrow failure and myelofibrosis occur in a small number of these patients.  Numerous immunologic abnormalities are common in individuals with Gaucher disease, including hypergammaglobulinemia, T-lymphocyte deficiency in the spleen, and impaired neutrophil chemotaxis.  
       Causes 
         All 3 forms of Gaucher disease are caused by glucocerebrosidase activity deficiency due to mutations in  GBA1, More than 300 different mutant GBA1 alleles have been identified in patients with Gaucher disease. Screening for the 6 most common  GBA1 Some mutations derive from recombination with the glucocerebrosidase pseudogene, a sequence 15 kb downstream that shares 96% sequence homology to glucocerebrosidase. Complex alleles with regions of pseudogene sequence, in which simple polymerase chain reaction (PCR)–based mutation detection screening is inadequate, have been identified in some patients.  Genotype and phenotype correlations have been noted in some specific Gaucher presentations. For example, patients with type 1 Gaucher disease who are homozygous for the N370S mutation tend to have a later onset and a relatively mild course, and patients with type 3 Gaucher disease who are homozygous for the D409H mutation exhibit a rare phenotype that involves cardiac calcifications, oculomotor abnormalities, and corneal opacities. However, clinical presentation in patients with Gaucher disease widely varies and frequently cannot be fully explained by the underlying mutations because severity can vary even among siblings who have identical genotypes.  Similarly, the amount of residual enzymatic activity does not accurately predict disease subtype and severity, with the exception that many of the mutations identified in patients with severe type 2 Gaucher disease express little, if any, enzymatic activity in vitro. These are frequently nonsense, frame-shift, or recombinant alleles that cannot form a complete protein and are essentially null alleles.  
     Differential Diagnoses 
       Diagnostic Considerations Multiple myeloma Parkinson disease: This is more common in patients with Gaucher disease and  GBA1 [ Lewy body dementia: Patients with Lewy body dementia are also far more likely to carry a mutation in  GBA1 [ 
       
         Sphingomyelinase Deficiency 
     Workup 
       Laboratory Studies 
         Enzyme activity testing Diagnosis can be confirmed through measurement of glucocerebrosidase activity in peripheral blood leukocytes. A finding of less than 15% of mean normal activity is diagnostic. Heterozygotes generally have half-normal enzyme activity, but as much as 20% overlap with activity levels of healthy controls has been reported, rendering enzymatic testing for carrier status unreliable.  
         Genotype testing Molecular diagnosis can be helpful, especially in Ashkenazi patients, in whom 6  GBA1 GBA1 
         CBC count Obtain CBC count and differential to assess the degree of cytopenia.  
         Liver function enzyme testing Minor elevations of liver enzyme levels are common, even in patients who are mildly affected with Gaucher disease; however, the presence of jaundice or impaired hepatocellular synthetic function merits a full hepatic evaluation. Coagulations studies should be monitored.  
         Associated marker testing Angiotensin-converting enzyme levels are typically elevated, as are total acid phosphatase and ferritin levels. Monitoring levels of another enzyme, chitotriosidase, is also useful in monitoring the disease, except in the 10% of the population who have a deficiency in this protein.  
       Imaging Studies 
         Ultrasonography of the abdomen can reveal the extent of organomegaly. MRI is more accurate than ultrasonography in determining organ size. Hip MRI may be useful in revealing early avascular necrosis. MRI may be useful in delineating the degree of marrow infiltration and evaluating spinal involvement. Skeletal radiography can be used to detect and evaluate skeletal manifestations of Gaucher disease. Perform chest radiography to evaluate pulmonary manifestations. Dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) is useful in evaluating osteopenia.  
       Other Tests 
         Echocardiograms are helpful in evaluating the possibility of pulmonary hypertension. In neurononpathic Gaucher disease, EEG, brainstem-evoked potential, swallow studies, and neuro-ophthalmalogic evaluation should be performed at regular intervals.  
       Procedures 
         Bone marrow aspiration  In the past, the diagnosis was confirmed with the finding of classic glycolipid-laden macrophages in bone marrow aspirate collected because of hematological abnormalities; however, aspiration is not a recommended diagnostic tool. Similar pseudo-Gaucher cells have also been described in individuals with other disorders, including chronic granulocytic leukemia,  thalassemia Hodgkin disease Mycobacterium avium– Bone marrow aspiration should not be the initial diagnostic test because the blood enzyme test is sensitive, specific, and much less invasive.  
         Liver biopsy Liver biopsy is occasionally performed to assess unexplained hepatomegaly. It can be avoided in most patients when the diagnosis is suspected because a specific diagnostic test is available.  
       Histologic Findings 
         In Gaucher disease, classic glycolipid-laden macrophages are found in bone marrow aspirate or in liver biopsy samples. On liver biopsy samples, glycolipid-laden Gaucher cells are evident in the sinusoids, but the hepatocytes do not manifest overt glycolipid storage, presumably because of biliary excretion of glucocerebroside and because exogenous glycolipid turnover is handled by the mononuclear phagocytes. The sparing of hepatocytes is consistent with the low incidence of liver failure in individuals with Gaucher disease.  The pathologic hallmark of Gaucher disease is the presence of Gaucher cells in the macrophage-monocyte system, particularly in the bone marrow. These cells, which are 20-100 mm in diameter, have a characteristic wrinkled-paper appearance, resulting from intracytoplasmic substrate deposition, and stain strongly positive with periodic acid–Schiff. Histologic evaluation of biopsy specimens should not be used as a first-line diagnostic tool.  
     Treatment & Management 
       Medical Care 
         Enzyme replacement Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) for type 1 Gaucher disease includes imiglucerase (Cerezyme), velaglucerase alfa (VPRIV), and taliglucerase alfa (Elelyso). Historically, most patients received the recombinant enzyme imiglucerase. [ ERT is indicated for patients with type 1 Gaucher disease who exhibit clinical signs and symptoms of the disease, including anemia, thrombocytopenia, skeletal disease, or visceromegaly. Severity and rate of disease progression widely varies, especially in adults, which makes treatment decisions extremely difficult in some patients. Generally, children who present symptomatically, rather than because of family history, may have severe disease manifestations that require early treatment. Presymptomatic treatment with ERT remains controversial because of the lack of prognostic correlation between genotype and disease severity and the high cost of the therapy.  For most patients with Gaucher disease in the United States, treatment with ERT is typically guided by a geneticist or a hematologist. Patients should receive periodic follow-up at a center familiar with Gaucher disease, if possible.  ERT has a remarkable effect on hepatosplenomegaly, with an average overall decrease of 25% in liver and spleen volume after 6 months of therapy. In most patients with anemia, hemoglobin levels rise by 1.5 g/dL during the first 4-6 months of therapy. An additional increase of 1 g/dL is observed in the subsequent 9-18 months in patients with persistent anemia. The platelet count responds more slowly, doubling on average over 1 year. The hematologic status of patients with splenomegaly must be closely monitored, and splenectomy is still occasionally necessary.  Skeletal disease is the slowest to respond, with symptomatic improvement described by some within the first year of treatment, although a much longer period of ERT is required to achieve a radiologic response. Patients with bone crises require pain relief, hydration, and close monitoring. A bone scan is sometimes needed to differentiate between a bone crisis and infection. Other effects of ERT in children with Gaucher disease include an increased growth velocity, weight gain, increased energy levels, and a correction of both delayed puberty and hypermetabolic state. The response of patients to ERT widely varies and does not correlate with genotype, disease severity, splenectomy, or age. However, a number of factors, including cirrhosis and portal hypertension, extensive infarction and fibrosis of the spleen, and lung involvement, portend a poor response to therapy.  The symptoms of patients with Gaucher disease who have associated hematologic malignancies respond relatively poorly to ERT. To overcome these difficulties, increased dosage and frequency of enzyme infusions have been attempted. The symptoms of patients with decompensated liver disease do not appear to respond well to ERT, and these patients remain at risk for life-threatening hemorrhage due to variceal bleeding.  No evidence shows that ERT results in neurologic improvement. Although the enzyme affects the visceral involvement in types 2 and 3 disease, the associated brain involvement may persist or progress.  
         Glucosylceramide synthase inhibitors Glucosylceramide synthase inhibitors include miglustat (Zavesca) and eliglustat (Cerdelga). Miglustat was approved in 2003 as monotherapy for treatment of adults with mild-to-moderate type 1 Gaucher disease for whom enzyme replacement therapy is not a therapeutic option.  Eliglustat was approved in August 2014 as first-line treatment for the long-term treatment of adults with Gaucher disease type 1. The dose of eliglustat is determined by establishing the patient’s CYP2D6 phenotype (ie, extensive metabolizers [EM], intermediate metabolizers [IM], or poor metabolizers [PM]).  Approval was based on efficacy data from 2 positive phase 3 studies involving 199 patients. One study involved patients new to therapy (trial 1), and the other involved patients switching from approved enzyme replacement therapies (trial 2). Efficacy data from 4 years of the Cerdelga phase 2 study also contributed to the approval. Improvements in study participants were observed in spleen size, platelet levels, hemoglobin levels, and liver volume, and noninferiority to enzyme replacement therapy (imiglucerase) was established in trial 2. [ 
       Surgical Care 
         Partial and total splenectomy was once advocated in the treatment of patients with Gaucher disease. However, with the availability of ERT, this procedure is no longer necessary in most patients.  In addition, patients with Gaucher disease may require hip replacements or other orthopedic procedures to treat skeletal disease. This is best undertaken after the patient has undergone several months of ERT.  
       Consultations 
         Consultations with the following specialists are indicated: 
           
             Medical geneticist 
             Hematologist 
             Orthopedist 
             Neurologist 
             Neuro-ophthalmologist 
       Diet 
         No dietary manipulation has been found to affect disease progression. 
       Activity 
         Patients with massive splenomegaly or severe thrombocytopenia should avoid contact sports and any other activities that place them at risk for splenic rupture or bleeding.  
     Medication 
       Medication Summary Several therapies have been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of type 1 Gaucher disease. Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) with glucocerebrosidase purified from human placenta was FDA approved in 1991, followed by approval in 1994 of a recombinant form of the enzyme produced in cultured Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells, marketed as imiglucerase (Cerezyme). Worldwide, over 4,000 patients with Gaucher disease have received ERT, which is safe and well tolerated.  In 2010, an alternate form of ERT was approved. This form of recombinant enzyme is produced in cultured human cells and is marketed as velaglucerase alfa (VPRIV). [ [ The glucosylceramide synthase inhibitors, miglustat and eliglustat, were approved for adults with type 1 Gaucher disease in 2003 and 2014 respectively. Approximately 10-15% of patients with Gaucher disease treated with imiglucerase develop antibodies to the enzyme protein, but few develop any significant allergic reactions, which are controlled with premedication with hydrocortisone, antihistamines, or both. All antibodies have immunoglobulin G (IgG), mostly of the IgG1 subclass. A few patients with Gaucher disease have developed antibodies that impair enzyme activity.  
       Enzyme replacement therapy 
         Class Summary In most cases, ERT is highly effective in reversing the visceral and hematologic manifestations of type 1 Gaucher disease. Recombinant beta-glucocerebrosidase (imiglucerase [Cerezyme]) has replaced the original tissue-derived product, alglucerase (Ceredase). Alglucerase is an orphan drug and still manufactured by Genzyme Corporation on an extremely limited basis for a few patients unable to tolerate the newer recombinant product. Presymptomatic use is controversial because of the high cost and the extremely variable clinical course.  Imiglucerase is approved for children aged 2 years or older. Velaglucerase and taliglucerase are both approved for children aged 4 years or older.  
         Imiglucerase (Cerezyme) A recombinant-derived analog of beta-glucocerebrosidase produced in mammalian cell culture and chemically modified by mannose termination of glycosylated amino acids. Catalyzes hydrolytic cleavage of glucocerebroside (a glycoprotein) to glucose and ceramide within the lysosomes of phagocytic cells in the reticuloendothelial system. Treatment with recombinant enzyme improves anemia and thrombocytopenia, reduces spleen and liver size, and decreases cachexia  
         Velaglucerase alfa (VPRIV) Hydrolytic lysosomal glucocerebroside-specific enzyme indicated for long-term enzyme replacement therapy for type 1 Gaucher disease. Improves symptoms associated with the disease, including anemia, thrombocytopenia, increased spleen and liver size, and cachexia.  
         Taliglucerase alfa (Elelyso) Taliglucerase is a plant-based recombinant enzyme. It catalyzes the hydrolysis of glucocerebroside to glucose and ceramide, which results in reduced spleen and liver enlargement and increased RBCs and platelets.  
       Glucosylceramide Synthase Inhibitors 
         Class Summary These agents inhibit the enzyme glucosylceramide synthase, the initial enzyme in a series of reactions that result in the synthesis of most glycosphingolipids, including glucocerebroside. The goal of treatment is to reduce the rate of glucocerebroside biosynthesis so that the amount is reduced to a level that allows the residual activity of the deficient glucocerebrosidase enzyme to be more effective (substrate reduction therapy).  
         Miglustat (Zavesca) Indicated for type 1 Gaucher disease in patients in whom ERT is not a therapeutic option. Reduces GSL production by inhibiting glucosylceramide synthase. Reduces spleen and liver volume and increases hemoglobin and platelet counts.  
         Eliglustat (Cerdelga) Eliglustat is a specific inhibitor of glucosylceramide synthase, thereby reducing production of glucosylceramide. It is indicated for the long-term treatment of adults with Gaucher disease type 1 who are CYP2D6 extensive metabolizers (EM), intermediate metabolizers (IM), or poor metabolizers (PM) as detected by an FDA-cleared test for phenotype. Dosage is based on establishing the patient's CYP2D6 metabolizer status.  
     Follow-up 
       Further Outpatient Care 
         Most symptomatic patients with Gaucher disease receive enzyme replacement therapy (ERT), which is provided on an outpatient basis. [ Monitoring patients who receive miglustat (Zavesca) every 6 months for possible development of peripheral neuropathy is recommended. Patients with osteoporosis have responded favorably to bisphosphonates. 
       Further Inpatient Care 
         Patients with Gaucher disease who have bone crises may require admission for pain relief. Patients with severe hematologic manifestations may have episodes of bleeding that require inpatient treatment.  
       Deterrence/Prevention 
         Gaucher disease is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. Although it is panethnic, Gaucher disease is more common in individuals of Ashkenazi Jewish. Although carrier-screening programs in this population have been established at some centers to identify couples at risk for having a child affected with Gaucher disease, testing must be offered in conjunction with genetic counseling to provide couples at risk, even asymptomatic individuals, with a description of the range of associated phenotypes and their options, which include prenatal diagnosis.  Newborn screening is not performed for Gaucher disease. 
       Complications 
         Bone crises may occur secondarily to infarcts. Avascular necrosis of the hip is not uncommon.  Splenic rupture can result from trauma. Cirrhosis is a rare complication. Rarely, pulmonary infiltration by Gaucher cells may manifest as overt lung disease, which may present as pulmonary infiltrates and lung consolidation; this pattern is especially common in patients with type 2 disease.  Parenchymal infiltration with fibrosis has been described in children with type 3 disease. Intrapulmonary vascular dilatation in the presence or absence of portal hypertension has also been described in some patients with Gaucher disease, resulting in hypoxic lung disease.  Adult patients with pulmonary hypertension in the absence of infiltrative disease have been described; these patients may follow an inexorable progressive course despite therapy.  Hematologic abnormalities, including anemia, thrombocytopenia, and leukopenia, are common in individuals with Gaucher disease Immunologic abnormalities, including hypergammaglobulinemia, T-lymphocyte deficiency in the spleen, and impaired neutrophil chemotaxis, are also common. The malignancy multiple myeloma is more common in individuals with Gaucher disease.  New evidence suggests that mutations in the gene for glucocerebrosidase are a risk factor for the development of Parkinson disease. [ [ 
       Prognosis 
         Many individuals with Gaucher disease have few manifestations and a normal life expectancy without any intervention. The prognosis for symptomatic patients with type 1 or type 3 Gaucher disease who receive treatment is very good, with a decrease in organomegaly and an eventual rise in hemoglobin levels and platelet counts.  A recent study estimated life expectancy at birth in patients with type 1 Gaucher disease to be 68 years, compared with 77 years in the reference population. [ Skeletal disease is slow to respond to ERT and widely varies. Some patients describe symptomatic improvement within the first year of treatment, although a much longer period of ERT is required to achieve a radiologic response.  
       Patient Education 
         Patients with Gaucher disease and their families require education regarding the disease manifestations, variability in symptoms and disease progression, and potential complications. In addition, they should be counseled regarding the genetic risks  
     start media 
       
         Autosomal recessive inheritance pattern.  Autosomal recessive inheritance pattern.  
     
       Author 
         Ellen Sidransky, MD Senior Investigator, Chief, Section on Molecular Neurogenetics, Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, NIH Ellen Sidransky, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American Society of Human Genetics International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society Society for Pediatric Research Society for Inherited Metabolic Disorders Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Pharmacy Editor 
         Mary L Windle, PharmD Adjunct Associate Professor, University of Nebraska Medical Center College of Pharmacy; Editor-in-Chief, Medscape Drug Reference Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Chief Editor 
         Maria Descartes, MD Professor, Department of Human Genetics and Department of Pediatrics, University of Alabama at Birmingham School of Medicine Maria Descartes, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American Academy of Pediatrics American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics American Medical Association American Society of Human Genetics Society for Inherited Metabolic Disorders International Skeletal Dysplasia Society Southeastern Regional Genetics Group Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
       Additional Contributors 
         Robert D Steiner, MD Executive Director, Marshfield Clinic Research Foundation; Chief Science Officer, Marshfield Clinic; Clinical Professor, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health Robert D Steiner, MD is a member of the following medical societies:  American Academy of Pediatrics American Association for the Advancement of Science Society for Pediatric Research Western Society for Pediatric Research Society for Inherited Metabolic Disorders Society for the Study of Inborn Errors of Metabolism American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics American Society of Human Genetics Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. 
     Acknowledgements 
       The author acknosledges the assistance of Mary E. LaMarca, who co-authored the initial version of this chapter prior to her death in 2010.  
     
       Harrison L. Evidence Mounting for Eliglustat in Gaucher's Disease. Medscape Medical News. Available at  http://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/834451 
       Vitner EB, Farfel-Becker T, Eilam R, Biton I, Futerman AH. Contribution of brain inflammation to neuronal cell death in neuronopathic forms of Gaucher's disease.  Brain [Medline] 
       Grabowski GA. Phenotype, diagnosis, and treatment of Gaucher's disease.  Lancet [Medline] 
       Sidransky E, Nalls MA, Aasly JO, Aharon-Peretz J, Annesi G, Barbosa ER. Multicenter analysis of glucocerebrosidase mutations in Parkinson's disease.  N Engl J Med [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Siebert M, Sidransky E, Westbroek W. Glucocerebrosidase is shaking up the synucleinopathies.  Brain [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Nalls MA,  Duran R,  Lopez G,  Kurzawa-Akanbi M,  McKeith IG,  Chinnery PF, et al. A multicenter study of glucocerebrosidase mutations in dementia with Lewy bodies.  JAMA Neurol [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Sidransky E, Pastores GM, Mori M. Dosing enzyme replacement therapy for Gaucher disease: older, but are we wiser?.  Genet Med [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Cerdelga (eliglustat) prescribing information. [package insert]. IDA Industrial Park, Old Kilmeaden Road, Waterford, Ireland: Genzyme Ireland, Ltd. August 2014.  
       Lowes, R. Medscape Medical News. FDA Clears Eliglustat (Cerdelga) for Gaucher Disease. Available at  http://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/830172 
       Zimran A, Altarescu G, Phillips M, Attias D, Jmoudiak M, Deeb M. Phase I/II and extension study of velaglucerase alfa (Gene-ActivatedTM human glucocerebrosidase) replacement therapy in adults with type 1 Gaucher disease: 48-month experience.  Blood [Medline] 
       Sidransky E, Pastores GM, Mori M. Dosing enzyme replacement therapy for Gaucher disease: older, but are we wiser?.  Genet Med [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Hollak CE. An evidence-based review of the potential benefits of taliglucerase alfa in the treatment of patients with Gaucher disease.  Core Evid [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Andersson H, Kaplan P, Kacena K, Yee J. Eight-year clinical outcomes of long-term enzyme replacement therapy for 884 children with Gaucher disease type 1.  Pediatrics [Medline] 
       Westbroek W, Gustafson AM, Sidransky E. Exploring the link between glucocerebrosidase mutations and parkinsonism.  Trends Mol Med [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Hruska KS, LaMarca ME, Scott CR, Sidransky E. Gaucher disease: mutation and polymorphism spectrum in the glucocerebrosidase gene (GBA).  Hum Mutat [Medline] 
       Weinreb NJ,  Deegan P,  Kacena KA,  Mistry P,  Pastores GM,  Velentgas P, et al. Life expectancy in Gaucher disease type 1.  Am J Hematol [Medline] 
       Mamopoulos AM, Hughes DA, Tuck SM, Mehta AB. Gaucher disease and pregnancy.  J Obstet Gynaecol [Medline] 
       AH Futerman and A Zimran.  Gaucher Disease 
       Amato D, Stachiw T, Clarke JT, Rivard GE. Gaucher disease: variability in phenotype among siblings.  J Inherit Metab Dis [Medline] 
       Andersson HC, Charrow J, Kaplan P, et al. Individualization of long-term enzyme replacement therapy for Gaucher disease.  Genet Med [Medline] 
       Barton NW, Brady RO, Dambrosia JM, et al. Replacement therapy for inherited enzyme deficiency--macrophage-targeted glucocerebrosidase for Gaucher's disease.  N Engl J Med [Medline] 
       Beutler E. Lysosomal storage diseases: natural history and ethical and economic aspects.  Mol Genet Metab [Medline] 
       Beutler E, Gelbart T, Scott CR. Hematologically important mutations: Gaucher disease.  Blood Cells Mol Dis [Medline] 
       Beutler E, Grabowski GA, CR Scriver, et al Eds. The Metabolic and Molecular Bases of Inherited Disease.  McGraw-Hill, New York 
       Bohlega S, Kambouris M, Shahid M, et al. Gaucher disease with oculomotor apraxia and cardiovascular calcification (Gaucher type IIIC).  Neurology [Medline] 
       Charrow J, Andersson HC, Kaplan P, et al. Enzyme replacement therapy and monitoring for children with type 1 Gaucher disease: consensus recommendations.  J Pediatr [Medline] 
       Cox TM, Aerts JM, Andria G, et al. The role of the iminosugar N-butyldeoxynojirimycin (miglustat) in the management of type I (non-neuronopathic) Gaucher disease: a position statement.  J Inherit Metab Dis [Medline] 
       Depaolo J, Goker-Alpan O, Samaddar T, Lopez G, Sidransky E. The association between mutations in the lysosomal protein glucocerebrosidase and parkinsonism.  Mov Disord [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Futerman AH, Zimran A. Gaucher Disease.  CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL 
       Goker-Alpan O, Schiffmann R, Park JK, et al. Phenotypic continuum in neuronopathic Gaucher disease: an intermediate phenotype between type 2 and type 3.  J Pediatr [Medline] 
       Grabowski GA, Kacena K, Cole JA, et al. Dose-response relationships for enzyme replacement therapy with imiglucerase/alglucerase in patients with Gaucher disease type 1.  Genet Med [Medline] 
       Grabowski GA, Leslie N, Wenstrup R. Enzyme therapy for Gaucher disease: the first 5 years.  Blood Rev [Medline] 
       Itzchaki M, Lebel E, Dweck A, et al. Orthopedic considerations in Gaucher disease since the advent of enzyme replacement therapy.  Acta Orthop Scand [Medline] 
       Jmoudiak M, Futerman AH. Gaucher disease: pathological mechanisms and modern management.  Br J Haematol [Medline] 
       Koprivica V, Stone DL, Park JK, et al. Analysis and classification of 304 mutant alleles in patients with type 1 and type 3 Gaucher disease.  Am J Hum Genet [Medline] [Full Text] 
       [Guideline] Langlois S, Wilson RD. Carrier screening for genetic disorders in individuals of Ashkenazi Jewish descent.  J Obstet Gynaecol Can [Medline] 
       Lwin A, Orvisky E, Goker-Alpan O, et al. Glucocerebrosidase mutations in subjects with parkinsonism.  Mol Genet Metab [Medline] 
       Mistry PK, Abrahamov A. A practical approach to diagnosis and management of Gaucher's disease.  Baillieres Clin Haematol [Medline] 
       Mitsui J, Mizuta I, Toyoda A, Ashida R, et al. Mutations for Gaucher disease confer high susceptibility to Parkinson disease.  Arch Neurol [Medline] 
       NIH Technology Assessment Panel on Gaucher Disease. Gaucher disease. Current issues in diagnosis and treatment.  JAMA [Medline] 
       Park JK, Orvisky E, Tayebi N, et al. Myoclonic epilepsy in Gaucher disease: genotype-phenotype insights from a rare patient subgroup.  Pediatr Res [Medline] 
       Sibille A, Eng CM, Kim SJ, et al. Phenotype/genotype correlations in Gaucher disease type I: clinical and therapeutic implications.  Am J Hum Genet [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Sidransky E. Gaucher disease: complexity in a "simple" disorder.  Mol Genet Metab [Medline] 
       Svennerholm L, Erikson A, Groth CG, et al. Norrbottnian type of Gaucher disease--clinical, biochemical and molecular biology  aspects: successful treatment with bone marrow transplantation.  Dev Neurosci [Medline] 
       Tayebi N, Stone DL, Sidransky E. Type 2 Gaucher disease: an expanding phenotype.  Mol Genet Metab [Medline] 
       Tayebi N, Stubblefield BK, Park JK, et al. Reciprocal and nonreciprocal recombination at the glucocerebrosidase gene region: implications for complexity in Gaucher disease.  Am J Hum Genet [Medline] 
       Weinreb NJ, Aggio MC, Andersson HC, et al. Gaucher disease type 1: revised recommendations on evaluations and monitoring for adult patients.  Semin Hematol [Medline] 
       Wenstrup RJ, Roca-Espiau M, Weinreb NJ, Bembi B. Skeletal aspects of Gaucher disease: a review.  Br J Radiol [Medline] [Full Text] 
       Zimran A. How I treat Gaucher disease.  Blood [Medline] 
       Zimran A, Altarescu G, Rudensky B, et al. Survey of hematological aspects of Gaucher disease.  Hematology [Medline]

